TITLE: Open Labeled, Randomized, Switch-Over Study of Two Fixed Doses (10/15mg) Of Aripiprazole : To Evaluate its Safety And Efficacy in the Treatment of Indian Patients of Schizophrenia.

ABSTRACT 
  ABSTRACT: Aripiprazole is a new anti psychotic with a unique receptor binding profile that combines partial agonistic activity at D2 receptor and 5-HT 1A receptor and potent antagonism at 5-HT 2A receptor. This receptor profile makes it possible for it to act as a dopamine system stabilizer. Based on various short term and long term studies, aripiprazole has been found to be effective in schizophrenia and has no significant adverse effect on QTc prolongation, prolactin, serum lipids, and has a low potential for weight gain. Present study aims to evaluate the efficacy and tolerability of aripiprazole (10-15mg/day) in the treatment of Indian patients of schizophrenia and to see its effect on QTc interval, prolactin levels, serum lipids, plasma sugar and weight gain in these patients. Outpatients with an ongoing/newly diagnosed ICD-10 Schizophrenia (n=136) were randomly assigned to 10 or 15 mg dose of Aripiprazole for a period of six weeks. Clinical response was evaluated by the Positive And Negative Symptoms Scale (PANSS), Clinical Global Impression (CGI) scale and safety was evaluated by observing spontaneously reported adverse events and changes in various laboratory parameters. Switching schizophrenic patients to aripiprazole (10/15 mg) from both conventional and atypical anti-psychotics was safe and well tolerated. Six weeks after switching to aripiprazole, patients showed improvements in PANSS scores (P< 0.001), EPS, prolactin levels and weight over the baseline levels. No difference was seen in the 10 or 15mg dose groups. One hospitalization was reported (due to hepatitis E). Common side effects reported were insomnia, somnolence, nausea, vomiting and diarrhea. Aripiprazole is a safe and effective anti psychotic in Indian patients - both in newly diagnosed, as well as, in patients not responding to or intolerant to other available typical and atypical antipsychotics.