TITLE: The Effects of Deep Abdominal Muscle Strengthening Exercises on Respiratory
Function and Lumbar Stability

  ABSTRACT:
 [Purpose] The purpose of this study was to examine the effects of deep abdominal muscle
strengthening exercises on respiratory function and lumbar stability. [Subjects] From
among 120 male and female students, 22 whose thoraxes opened no more than 5 cm during
inspiration and expiration and whose forced expiratory flow rates were around 300 m/L were
recruited. The subjects were randomly divided into an experimental group of eleven, who
performed deep abdominal muscle strengthening exercises, and a control group of eleven,
who received no particular intervention. [Methods] The subjects were instructed to perform
normal breathing in the hook-lying position. They were then directed to hold their breath
for ten seconds at the end of inspiration. Ten repetitions of this breathing comprised a
set of respiratory training, and a total of five sets were performed by the subjects.
[Results] Deep abdominal muscle training was effective at enhancing respiratory function
and lumbar stabilization. [Conclusion] The clinical application of deep abdominal muscle
strengthening exercises along with lumbar stabilization exercises should be effective for
lower back pain patients in need of lumbar stabilization.

BODY.INTRODUCTION:
The lungs cannot contract by themselves during respiration. Instead, they passively
contract and relax as a result of the contraction and relaxation of the thoracic cage
respiratory muscles, leading to gas exchange between the air and the lungs1). While relaxed expiration is performed by
the passive recoil of the diaphragm, during forced expiration, the air is driven out as the
diaphragm is forced upwards by a rise in intra-abdominal pressure induced by contraction of
the abdominal muscles2). Moreover, the
diaphragm, a component of core stability, plays a role in respiration and trunk stability by
controlling intra-abdominal pressure and reducing the stress on the spine through
cooperative action with the abdominal and pelvic floor muscles3, 4). The diaphragm is composed
of the muscles and tendons that separate the chest from the abdominal cavity, and forms the
floor of the thoracic cavity. Beginning from the thoracic outlet, it is divided into three
parts—sternal, costal, and lumbar. The costal part of the diaphragm connects with the origin
of the transversus abdominis in the shape of a finger on the insides of the costal
cartilages on both sides of the last six ribs5). The transversus abdominis is the diaphragm's partner, and its upper
part is connected to the inner part of the lower thoracic cage. Moreover, its back is linked
to the lumbar vertebra by discs comprised of fibers, while its lower part is joined to the
iliac crest and the inguinal ligament in the arched femoral region6). It has been reported that during lumbo-pelvic motion
control tests, diaphragmatic activity increases in healthy subjects7) and decreases in patients with diaphragmatic injuries8). Moreover, patients with chronic lower back
pain have often been reported to have defects in posture and motor control9, 10).
Considering the anatomical structure of the diaphragm and the transversus abdominis, we
consider that decreased contractility of the diaphragm, which may be caused by diaphragmatic
injuries, would lead to a decrease in transversus abdominis activity and lumbar
stability.  This study aimed to determine the effects of enhanced diaphragmatic function achieved
through deep abdominal muscle strengthening exercises on respiratory function and lumbar
stability.

BODY.SUBJECTS AND METHODS:
For this study, 22 subjects whose thoraxes opened no more than 5 cm during inspiration and
expiration and whose forced expiratory flow rates were around 300 m/L were recruited from
among 120 male and female students. The subjects were randomly divided into an experimental
group of eleven (five males and six females), who engaged in deep abdominal muscle
strengthening exercises, and a control group of eleven (four males and seven females), who
experienced no particular intervention. Those with muscular, skeletal, or nervous problems,
patients with lung diseases or lower back pain, and smokers were excluded. The selected
subjects were provided with detailed explanation about the intent and content of this study
and signed a voluntary consent form. The mean age, height, and weight of the subjects were
22.55±5.75 years, 166.27±8.65 cm, and 62.64±13.60 kg, respectively, for the experimental
group, and 20.82±1.78 years, 159.18±4.7 cm, and 52.18±3.97 kg, respectively, for the control
group. The gender of the subjects was analyzed using a χ2 test, while the age,
height, and weight were analyzed using the independent t-tests. There were no statistically
significant differences detected in the two analyses (p>0.05), which indicates the two
groups were homogneous.  The deep abdominal strengthening training method suggested by Richardson et al.11) was modified and performed by the
experimental group. The thoracic and abdominal motion during respiration in the hook-lying
position was observed while the subjects engaged in natural breathing, namely deep
breathing. By touching the ribs on both sides with the hands, increases in the transverse
diameter and the diameter of the thoracic cavity and its frontal opening during inspiration
were demonstrated. Normal respiration in a reverse pattern during expiration was also
confirmed. The subjects were instructed to hold their breath for ten seconds at the end of
inspiration. Ten repetitions of this breathing comprised one set of respiratory training,
and a total of five sets were performed by the subjects. A one-minute break was given after
each set, and the training was conducted once a day three times a week, for four weeks. A
Cardio Touch 3000S (BIONET) was used to measure two pulmonary function indices, FVC (forced
vital capacity) and FEV1 (forced expiratory volume for 1 second), of the subjects. The
measured values were recorded only when both measurements were obtained without any error.
Moreover, three values were recorded, and the average value was used in the analyses. Lumbar
stability was measured based on the contractility of the transversus abdominis by using a
PBU (pressure biofeedback unit). For this measurement, the subjects were instructed to
practice their normal breathing patterns in the hook-lying position. While doing this, the
hollowing training method was performed using the transversus abdominis. Then, the subjects
were directed to maintain spinal stabilization in the neutral position, and the PBU was
placed on the lower back at the level of PSIS. With a basic pressure of 40 mmHg, the changes
were measured while the transversus abdominis was contracted during normal inspiration and
expiration.  During the measurement, a physical therapist with more than ten years of clinical
experience palpated the point 5 cm inside the anterior superior iliac spine of the subjects
to evaluate the contraction of the transversus abdominis, thereby controlling the
compensation caused by the contraction of the rectus abdominal muscles and the external
oblique abdominal muscles, and inducing that of the transversus abdominis as far as
possible. Increased pressure during the test indicateed improvement in the contractility of
the transversus abdominis, suggesting enhanced stabilization.  Differences in the measured data were tested with the paired t-tests were conducted using
SPSS 12.0 for Windows in order to compare the differences within each group before and after
the intervention. The differences between the two groups were tested using the independent
t-test. The statistical significance level, α, was chosen as 0.05.

BODY.RESULTS:
 Table 1.  Comparison of FVC, FEV1, PBU between pre-test and post-test in each group
(Mean±SD)   Category experimental group control FVC (ℓ) Pre-test 2.72±0.95 1.83±0.74 Post-test 2.90±0.97* 1.86±0.53 FEV1 (ℓ) Pre-test 2.42±0.61 1.81±0.70 Post-test 2.56±0.70* 1.85±0.53 PBU (mmHg) Pre-test 41.18±1.32 41.64±1.29 Post-test 44.09±3.08* 41.27±0.90 * p<0.05; FVC, Forced vital capacity; FEV1, Forced expiratory volume in 1 second;
PBU, Pressure biofeedback unit   Table 2.  Comparison of FVC, FEV1, PBU between the experimental group and the control group
(Mean±SD)   Category experimental group control FVC (ℓ) Pre-test 2.72±0.95 1.83±0.74 Post-test* 2.90±0.97 1.86±0.53 difference between pre-and post-test* 0.18±0.72 0.03±0.39 FEV1 (ℓ) Pre-test 2.42±0.61 1.81±0.70 Post-test* 2.56±0.70 1.85±0.53 difference between pre-and post-test* 0.15±0.91 0.04±0.38 PBU (mmHg) Pre-test 41.18±1.32 41.64±1.29 Post-test* 44.09±3.08 41.27±0.90 difference between pre-and post-test* 2.90±2.55 0.36±0.81 * p<0.05   In the comparison of FVC and FEV1 before and after the training, the experimental group
showed significant increases in both FVC and FEV1. Furthermore, the comparison of the
contractility of the transversus abdominis before and after the training revealed that the
experimental group displayed significant changes in the contractility of the transversus
abdominis (Table 1). The independent t-tests was
carried out to examine differences in FVC, FEV1, and the contractility of the transversus
abdominis in the two groups before and after the training and the before-and-after changes.
The results showed that the values before the training were not statistically significant,
while the experimental group exhibited significant before-and-after changes (Table 2).

BODY.DISCUSSION:
The diaphragm, the main muscle of inspiration, is involved in trunk stability and posture
control12), and the transversus
abdominis engages in posture and motor control and respiration13). Among studies on respiratory muscle training, Hall et
al.14) suggested a respiratory muscle
training method, while Richardson et al.11) examined a deep abdominal muscle training method, and Roussel et
al.15) looked into the changes in
breathing patterns experienced by chronic lower back pain patients.  Lumbar instability is a major cause of lower back pain9), and spinal stability is crucial for the prevention of lumbar
injuries16). Akuthota and Nadler17) described the core muscles that stabilize
the trunk and the spine regardless of the movements of the extremities as being the
diaphragm, the multifidus muscle, the transverse muscle of abdomen, and the pelvic floor
muscle, and also stated that these muscles act as one unit at the center of functional
kinetic chains. In other words, spinal stability is achieved by the co-contraction of the
trunk muscles, and such contraction is necessary in order to maintain a proper level of
spinal stability to prevent and treat lower back pain18). Michael et al.19) noted that the co-contraction of the abdominal muscles and the
diaphragm increases intra-abdominal pressure, fixes the trunk, and reduces the stress on the
spine, especially the lumbar region. It automatically happens when a subject lifts a heavy
object, decreasing the load by about 50% in the high lumbar region, and about 30% in the low
lumbar region. It also reduces the load experienced by the back muscles by more than 50%.
These results suggest that well-built abdominal muscles may be important for the prevention
and treatment of spinal diseases.  The results of the present study indicate that the deep abdominal muscle strengthening
exercise was effective at increasing vital capacity. The contractility of the diaphragm and
the transversus abdominis in particular influences the partial stabilization of the lumbar
spine and functions as a type of regulatory mechanism, causing changes in breathing
patterns.  To conclude, enhanced diaphragmatic function achieved via deep abdominal muscle
strengthening exercises not only increased respiratory volume but also played a role in
stabilizing the lumbar spine through the co-contraction of the transversus abdominis. Thus,
this method can be reduce lower back pain and enhance respiration and trunk stability when
lumbar stabilization exercises are clinically administered for patients with a low level of
stability. Furthermore, this method needs to be compared with other methods in future
studies.