TITLE: OA01.12. A clinical study of efficacy of Vyoshadi gutika and Pippalayadi churna avapida nasya in the management of Pratishyaya

  ABSTRACT.PURPOSE::
Pratishyay basically is a Vat-kaphaj disorder arising from accumulation of vitiated Vat along with kaph-pitta-rakta in uttamang (shirh pradesh) and comparable to Rhinitis which describes a group of symptoms including runny nose, stuffiness, sneezing usually due to common cold, environmental irritants and immunodeficiency. This study aim to do 1. Evaluation of effectiveness of Vyoshadi gutika (samshaman therapy) and Pippalayadi churna Avapida nasya (samshodhan therapy) in the management of pratishyay, 2. Statistical assessment of data post treatment.

ABSTRACT.METHOD::
60 patients of Pratishyay aged between 16-60 years of age of both sexes complaining of Rhinorrhoea/ nasal block, sneezing, heaviness of head, anosmia were selected randomly and assigned for clinical study were divided into 2 groups. Group A consisting of 30 patients had internal administration of Vyoshadi gutika in a dose of 2 tablets QID (each tab. 375 mg) with lukewarm water for 30 days. Group B-30 patients took Vyoshadi gutika along with Pippalayadi churna Avapida nasya (6 drops in each nostril early morning) for duration of 21 days. All patients were advised to attend 15 days Intercal regularly for 3 months for assessment of disease through subjective and objective parameters.

ABSTRACT.RESULT::
60% patients (18 no.) of Group B while 47% patients (14 no.) Group A responded satisfactorily with maximum improvement (more than 76% symptomatic improvement). Similarly, Moderate improvement (between 51-75%) was seen in 47 patients of Group A and 37% of Group B while mild improvement in 10% and 3% patients of Group A and B respectively. No untoward adverse effects were seen in any patients.

ABSTRACT.CONCLUSION::
It can be concluded that on the basis of Practical, Therapeutic and Statistical analysis, patients of both groups got satisfactory improvement. Besides, patients treated with both Samshodhan Nasya therapy and Samshaman Vyoshadi Gutika therapy comparatively got better results.