TITLE: Specialization in interlimb transfer between dominant and non-dominant hand
skills

ABSTRACT 
  ABSTRACT: [Purpose] This study aimed to confirm the specialization of interlimb transfer in
occupationally embedded tasks between dominant and non-dominant hands. [Subjects] Twelve
neurologically intact participants were recruited. [Methods] The participants were divided
into two training groups and performed training with their dominant or non-dominant hand.
Three subtests of the Jebsen-Taylor Hand Function Test were used to practice interlimb
transfer training in each group. All Jebsen-Taylor Hand Function Test subtests were
evaluated using the untrained hand before and after 5 days of training. [Results] The
dominant hand group showed significant differences after training when using the untrained
hand in the simulated feeding and lifting large heavy objects subtests. Meanwhile, the
non-dominant hand group showed significant differences after training when using the
untrained hand in the turning cards, simulated feeding, stacking checkers, and lifting
large heavy objects subtests. [Conclusion] When performing occupationally embedded tasks,
the dominant hand has interlimb transfer advantages with respect to predictable dynamic
movements, while the non-dominant hand has interlimb transfer advantages in
stabilization.

BODY.INTRODUCTION: "Interlimb transfer" is an interesting phenomenon in stroke rehabilitation in which the
untrained hand benefits from practice with the opposite hand1. Thus, interlimb transfer learning could be applied as a paradigm for the
recovery of related functional lateralization. This phenomenon demonstrates that the corpus
callosum plays a role in connecting neural pathways between brain hemispheres through
interhemispheric communication. However, the major changes in motor output systems after
unilateral motor practice remain unclear2, 3. Wang and Sainburg (2007) demonstrate that the
non-dominant arm can be conditioned for the final position of arm reaching movement4).
Conversely, the dominant arm can be trained for trajectory accuracy in the acceleration
phase of reaching motion. Thus, the advantages of dominant and non-dominant arm performance
in daily tasks can be evaluated. Each side of the body attains different amplitudes of
movements in targeted single-joint tasks, such as speed, accuracy, and acceleration
parameters; this also demonstrates the lateralization of this phenomenon4, 5. Individuals
afflicted by unilateral impairment are treated by occupational therapists, whose main goal
is to train and retrain patients to perform motor tasks in order to enhance their functional
abilities in daily life6. The ultimate aim of stroke
rehabilitation is to enable independent functioning in daily life. Accordingly, a previous
study compared to the interlimb transfer specialization during a simple reaching
movement7. Thus, the present study aimed to confirm
interlimb transfer specialization of occupationally embedded tasks between dominant and
non-dominant hands.

BODY.SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Twelve neurologically intact subjects (mean age: 20.61 ± 0.77 years) were recruited. They
received an explanation about the purpose and methods of the study and provided informed
consent prior to participation in accordance with the ethical principles of the Declaration
of Helsinki. The participants had no orthopedic diseases, and the right hand was determined
to be dominant through interviews. Participants practiced training conditions with their
dominant and non-dominant hands and were randomly divided into the dominant or non-dominant
training group (n = 6 each); the evaluator was not blinded to the
experiment. We used three subtests of the Jebsen-Taylor Hand Function Test (JHFT) to
practice interlimb transfer in each group: lifting small objects, simulated feeding, and
lifting large heavy objects. After the baseline evaluation, each group practiced the three
subtest tasks using one hand. After 30-minute training sessions for 5 days, all JHFT
subtests were performed using the opposite hand. This evaluation tool was used as a primary
measure of the untrained hand. The JHFT is generally used for hand and dexterity assessment
in the performance of everyday skills; it has good validity and reliability, and very few
learning effects (subtests; writing a letter, turning a card, lifting small objects,
stacking checkers, simulated feeding, lifting large light objects, and lifting large heavy
objects)7). Participants were divided
into two groups according to which hand was used for training. The dominant hand group
performed the three subtests using their non-dominant hand and vice versa to simulate
activities of daily living. The training tools were placed at the midline of the body. Each
training session was 30 min long. The participants practiced for 5 days over a 1-week
period. Parametric analysis was used to summarize individual JHFT ordinal scores. Each JHFT
subtest was performed three times, and the best two scores were used to calculate the
average pre- and post-training scores. All testing processes were evaluated at the beginning
and end of each training session. SPSS version 22.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA) was used
to analyze the interlimb transfer effect between the dominant and non-dominant hands.
Because the data were not normally distributed, the non-parametric Wilcoxon signed-rank test
was used for intra-group comparisons. The level of significance for all tests was set at p
< 0.05.

BODY.RESULTS: Interlimb transfer during basic tasks was compared between the dominant and non-dominant
hand groups. The dominant hand group showed significant differences after training in the
simulated feeding and lifting large heavy objects tasks with the untrained hand (p <
0.05; Table 1Table 1.Interlimb transfer in the dominant hand training group (n = 6)
(Units: seconds)JHFTSubtestsNon-dominant hand (mean ± SD)Pre-trainingPost-trainingWriting a letter16.63 ± 6.2914.52 ± 1.66Turning a card3.54 ± 0.912.82 ± 0.33Lifting small objects6.34 ± 0.845.15 ± 1.04Stacking checkers1.82 ± 0.461.56 ± 0.45Simulated feeding8.46 ± 2.295.58 ± 0.55*Lifting large light objects3.25 ± 0.442.79 ± 0.30Lifting large heavy objects3.41 ± 0.342.67 ± 0.18**: p <
0.05

BODY.DISCUSSION: According to the interlimb transfer phenomenon, the performance of a required hand skill is
likely to be learned by the opposite hand5, 6). The present study differed from previous
works, which utilized occupationally embedded task training. We performed dominant and
non-dominant hand training tests for interlimb transfer specialization and compared the
results. The dominant hand generally has superior skills compared to the non-dominant hand.
Previous reports indicate the dominant hand utilizes trajectory accuracy control for
adaptation to movement. Meanwhile, the non-dominant hand is used for endpoint control to
achieve a steady posture. For example, the dominant hand can better perform dynamic tasks
such as combing and cutting, while the non-dominant hand is superior for performing
stabilizing activities8,9,10). The present study
utilized the JHFT, which is frequently used in neuropsychological evaluations of various
motor functions. Longer performance times during the task activity indicate awkward and
slower movement. The present results support the possibility of specialization in interlimb
transfer for each hemisphere after training for occupationally embedded tasks9, 11).
Task learning transfer is an important aspect of learning theory, and activity
generalization is an important aspect of rehabilitation recovery. The goal of rehabilitation
in occupational therapy is positive occupation transfer at home and work. In the present
study, the results of the dominant hand group in the simulated feeding and lifting large
heavy objects subtests differed significantly after training. Meanwhile, the non-dominant
hand group showed significant differences in the turning cards, simulated feeding, stacking
checkers, and lifting large heavy objects subtests after training. Thus, the present results
support the possibility of specialization in interlimb transfer for each hemisphere after
training for occupationally embedded tasks12, 13). This study has several limitations.
Individuals were generally right-handed and were not supervised by a professional therapist.
Meanwhile, approximately 60% of stroke patients have left hemisphere damage with ideomotor
limb apraxia; therefore, when experiencing moderate-to-severe hemiplegia, they usually use a
lead controller for occupationally embedded tasks14,
15). Thus, further research aiming to
develop novel rehabilitation treatments for patients with hemisphere damage should take
these diagnostic variables into consideration.