TITLE: Butyrylated starch intake can prevent red meat-induced
O

ABSTRACT 
  ABSTRACT: Epidemiological studies have identified increased colorectal cancer (CRC) risk with high
red meat (HRM) intakes, whereas dietary fibre intake appears to be protective. In the
present study, we examined whether a HRM diet increased rectal
O6-methyl-2-deoxyguanosine (O6MeG) adduct levels in healthy human
subjects, and whether butyrylated high-amylose maize starch (HAMSB) was protective. A
group of twenty-three individuals consumed 300 g/d of cooked red meat without (HRM diet)
or with 40 g/d of HAMSB (HRM+HAMSB diet) over 4-week periods separated by a 4-week washout
in a randomised cross-over design. Stool and rectal biopsy samples were collected for
biochemical, microbial and immunohistochemical analyses at baseline and at the end of each
4-week intervention period. The HRM diet increased rectal O6MeG adducts
relative to its baseline by 21 % (P< 0·01), whereas the addition
of HAMSB to the HRM diet prevented this increase. Epithelial proliferation increased with
both the HRM (P< 0·001) and HRM+HAMSB
(P< 0·05) diets when compared with their respective baseline
levels, but was lower following the HRM+HAMSB diet compared with the HRM diet
(P< 0·05). Relative to its baseline, the HRM+HAMSB diet increased
the excretion of SCFA by over 20 % (P< 0·05) and increased the
absolute abundances of the Clostridium coccoides group
(P< 0·05), the Clostridium
leptum group (P< 0·05),
Lactobacillus spp. (P< 0·01),
Parabacteroides distasonis (P< 0·001) and
Ruminococcus bromii (P< 0·05), but lowered
Ruminococcus torques (P< 0·05) and the
proportions of Ruminococcus gnavus, Ruminococcus torques
and Escherichia coli (P< 0·01). HRM consumption
could increase the risk of CRC through increased formation of colorectal epithelial
O6MeG adducts. HAMSB consumption prevented red meat-induced adduct formation,
which may be associated with increased stool SCFA levels and/or changes in the microbiota
composition.

BODY: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most frequently diagnosed malignancies worldwide,
accounting for 10 % of all cancers and for approximately 20 % of all cancer-related deaths in
developed countries(

1

). Although there is a genetic component in CRC development, diet and other
lifestyle factors are estimated to explain as much as 30–50 % of the global incidence of the
disease(

2

). According to the recent report from the World Cancer Research Fund and American
Institute for Cancer Research (WCRF/AICR)(

2

,

3

), there is convincing evidence that intake of red and processed meat increases the
risk of CRC, whereas intake of dietary fibre is protective(

4

).  A variety of mechanisms have been proposed to link red and processed meat consumption and the
risk of CRC(

5

). For red meat, in particular, it has been suggested that its high content of haem
Fe is a substantial contributor(

6

). Red meat undergoes fermentation in the colon that might alter the microbiota
composition and result in the production of potentially genotoxic products that could play a
role in oncogenesis. These agents include N-nitroso compounds (NOC), a complex mixture of
nitrite-derived products formed either in processed meat itself or endogenously in the human
gut via bacterial metabolism. NOC are alkylating agents that generate DNA adducts in human
colonocytes after high red meat consumption(

7

). We have recently shown that the level of the pro-mutagenic adduct
O6-methyl-2-deoxyguanosine (O6MeG) is increased in murine colonocytes
after consuming a diet high in red meat(

8

). O6MeG is a known toxic and mutagenic base modification that, if
unrepaired, can induce GC → AT transition mutations (typically found in the
K-ras gene in human CRC)(

9

) and also recombination events or mutations in the form of sister chromatid
exchanges(

10

). More recently, it has been suggested that high red meat consumption can increase
the expression of certain oncogenic microRNA(

11

).  Dietary fibre is a heterogeneous group of compounds, principally indigestible carbohydrates
of plant origin that include NSP, starches that escape digestion in the small intestine
(resistant starches, RS) and oligosaccharides. One possible mechanism for the reduction in the
risk of CRC by dietary fibre is the production of SCFA via fermentation by the large-bowel
microbiota(

12

). Of the major SCFA, butyrate is of particular interest as it appears to be the
preferred metabolic substrate for colonocytes, and butyrate also promotes a normal cellular
phenotype. In vitro studies with CRC cell lines have shown that butyrate
induces apoptosis(

13

), reduces cell proliferation and promotes differentiation(

14

). Animal experiments have shown that butyrate may reduce colorectal carcinogenesis
by enhancing the apoptotic response to methylating carcinogens(

15

,

16

).  Increasing large-bowel butyrate supply has the potential to improve colonic function and
lower disease risk. RS is thought to be particularly effective in this regard as its
fermentation generally favours butyrate production. Red meat and fibre (including RS) are
generally consumed together as components of foods. Our animal studies have shown that dietary
RS is able to oppose colonocyte DNA strand breaks, telomere shortening and pro-mutagenic DNA
adduct formation in rodents fed red meat(

8

,

17

,

18

). This protective effect correlated most closely with large-bowel butyrate levels,
supporting a role for fermentation in risk modification. Acylated starches (classified as RS4,
chemically modified), in which the acyl group is linked to the starch framework by an ester
bond, can deliver specific SCFA to the large bowel where bacterial esterases release the SCFA.
Ingestion of butyrylated high-amylose maize starch increases colonic butyrate levels in
animals(

19

) and humans(

20

). Accordingly, the present study was carried out in healthy individuals to
determine whether high red meat consumption generated O6MeG adducts in rectal
epithelial cells, and whether concurrent consumption of high red meat and butyrylated
high-amylose maize starch opposed this effect (primary aim). We also investigated the effects
of these diets on other indices of colonic health including rectal proliferation, colonic
fermentation products and microbiota composition, as these might participate in the generation
of adducts.

BODY.METHODS.STUDY DESIGN AND PARTICIPANTS: Overview of the randomised cross-over intervention study design. HRM, high red
meat; HAMSB, butyrylated high-amylose maize starch.

BODY.METHODS.SAMPLE COLLECTION: Stool and rectal pinch biopsy samples were obtained at the completion of the 4-week entry
period (baseline) and at the end of each intervention period. A complete faecal collection
was made by all participants for the last 48 h of each dietary period, and the samples
were stored in portable freezers ( − 20°C). At each visit to the Flinders Medical Centre
clinic, an experienced gastroenterologist collected four rectal mucosal biopsies using
alligator forceps through a 25 cm rigid sigmoidoscope; this procedure was performed
without bowel preparation or prior dietary restriction. Biopsies were formalin-fixed and
dehydrated through gradient alcohol and xylene before being embedded in paraffin wax.

BODY.METHODS.STOOL ANALYSES: Faecal samples were thawed at 4°C, pooled, homogenised, and then subsampled for analysis.
For the determination of SCFA, weighed portions were diluted at 1:3 (w/w) with deionised
water containing 1·68 mmol heptanoic acid/l as an internal standard (Sigma Chemical Co.),
and processed for SCFA analysis using GC as described previously(

8

). Total SCFA concentration was calculated as the sum of acetic, propionic,
butyric, isobutyric, caproic, isovaleric and valeric acid concentrations. Total
branched-chain fatty acids concentration was calculated as the sum of isobutyric and
isovaleric acid concentrations. Phenol and p-cresols were measured in the
faeces by using vacuum microdistillation and HPLC(

22

). Faecal NH3 concentration was measured by using the indophenol
blue method(

23

). Aqueous extracts of the faeces were prepared by diluting 1 g faeces with
4 ml of distilled water, homogenised and centrifuged (4500 rpm, 4°C)(

24

), and total apparent NOC were measured by chemical denitrosation with HBr and
chemiluminescence detection of the released nitric oxide using a thermal energy analyser
(TEA)(

25

,

26

). Concentrations were calculated by comparing the TEA response of a faecal
water sample with the response of an N-nitrosodipropylamine standard
(16·6 μg/ml), and values were expressed as total apparent NOC (ng/ml)(

27

).

BODY.METHODS.RECTAL BIOPSY ANALYSIS: Light microscope images (20 ×  optical zoom) of human rectal crypts showing
O6-methyl-2-deoxyguanosine staining intensity from the baseline and after
the 4-week intervention phase selected from participant #20. Images showing the
sections (a) at the end of the high red meat (HRM) baseline, (b) at the end of the
4-week HRM treatment, (c) at the end of the HRM+butyrylated high-amylose maize
starch (HAMSB) baseline and (d) at the end of the 4-week HRM+HAMSB treatment.

BODY.METHODS.MOLECULAR MICROBIOLOGY: Extraction of DNA from stool samples and subsequent quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) was
performed and analysed according to the method used by Christophersen and colleagues(

36

). In brief, DNA was extracted using a repeat bead beating and column clean-up
method, and qPCR assays amplified the 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene (or in the case of
sulphate-reducing bacteria the adenosine-5′-phosphosulfate reductase
(aps) gene) using primers that targeted bacterial species or groups of
interest. The primer pairs and their amplification conditions are listed in online
Supplementary Table S5. Data are expressed as absolute abundances and as a proportion of
total bacteria. Bacterial targets were chosen for their relevance to gut health. In other
words, we selected key species (e.g. F. prausnitzii) or groups of
bacteria (e.g. C.
coccoides group) that were responsible for the production of butyrate
following fermentation of complex carbohydrates, particularly RS, by bacteria such
Ruminococcus bromii. P.
distasonis was chosen because of its potential role in the cleavage of
butyrate from the butyrylated RS used in the study. We also examined changes in some
potentially enteropathogenic species (e.g. E.
coli), as well as in general groups such as
Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium that are regarded as
markers of bowel health by many. A range of other bacteria such as those implicated in gut
mucus barrier turnover and inflammatory bowel disease, such as A.
muciniphila, were also targeted. Sulphate-reducing bacteria were included to
determine whether the production of toxic hydrogen sulphide could contribute to
large-bowel DNA adduct formation in response to red meat treatment.

BODY.METHODS.STATISTICAL METHODS: All statistical analyses were performed with scripts in R, version 3.0.1, using the R
statistical package(

37

). Analyses were carried out using a linear mixed-effects model, with subjects
as the random effect, on either base-10 logarithm-transformed data, where necessary, or on
untransformed data for each of the variables.  Dietary intake of the study participants during each diet period, based on 3 d
weighed food records (Mean values with their standard errors; percentages)  The effects on the overall composition of the gut microbiota were analysed by combining
all qPCR assays and performing a permutational-based multivariate analysis. Data were
log-transformed before producing a resemblance matrix using Euclidean distance.
Differences between the interventions were tested on first-period cross-sectional
comparison only using Permanova+ version 1.06 (PRIMER-E). A P
value < 0·05 was considered significant.

BODY.RESULTS.STUDY COMPARISONS FOR THE WHOLE DATASET: Initial analyses were carried out using the two periods of the trial, including baseline
and washout periods. However, data analyses of the initial study showed that some of the
response variables had carry-over effects, including the primary end-point
O6MeG, epithelial proliferation, certain bacterial species but not SCFA (see
online Supplementary material for a full study dataset). There was a significant increase
in the rectal crypt O6MeG adduct load when the participants consumed the HRM
diet first compared with all the other intervention stages
(P< 0·01; see online Supplementary Fig. S2(A)); however, when the
participants consumed the HRM+HAMSB diet as the first intervention, there was no change in
the O6MeG adduct load with the subsequent consumption of HRM (see online
Supplementary Fig. S2(B)). There was a significant effect of treatment and treatment order
on PCNA-positive cells/crypt (see online Supplementary Fig. S3(A) and (B)). For the
participants on the HRM or HRM+HAMSB diet as their first intervention, the PCNA-positive
cells significantly increased (P< 0·001). For those on the HRM or
HRM+HAMSB diet (received as their first intervention), the positive cells significantly
decreased after consuming their final treatment compared with the first treatment.
Participants who consumed the HRM diet as the first treatment had significantly higher
PCNA-positive cells/crypt compared with those who consumed the HRM diet as the second
treatment (P< 0·001). We also observed that numbers of some
bacteria in the washout phase were significantly different from those during the entry
period or the dietary interventions (see online Supplementary Tables S3 and S4). The
analysis revealed a diet-order effect on the microbiota composition. When the volunteers
consumed the HRM+HAMSB diet as the first intervention, their microbiota composition
significantly differed from that of the entry levels (P= 0·02), as well
as from that of the subsequent HRM intervention (P= 0·02) and the washout
levels (P= 0·005) in the same volunteers. Furthermore, the microbiota
composition of these volunteers consuming the HRM+HAMSB diet first was also significantly
different from that of those consuming HRM first (P= 0·01). However, when
the volunteers consumed the HRM diet first, the microbial composition during the
subsequent consumption of the HRM+HAMSB diet was only different from that of the washout
levels (P= 0·02).

BODY.RESULTS.STUDY COMPARISONS FOR THE FIRST PERIOD: The results arising from the respective baseline periods and the first arm of the dietary
intervention (i.e. at week 4 of the intervention) are described in detail below, as the
results of the second arm (cross-over) showed carry-over effects for O6MeG,
epithelial proliferation and certain bacterial species. The study was still adequately
powered based on the primary end-point 'O6MeG'. Calculations using a two-tailed
t test with a power of 80 % with means of 60·8 and 77·4 and a standard
deviation of 15 showed that group sizes of five were adequate to detect a difference
between the baseline and the HRM intervention.

BODY.RESULTS.DEMOGRAPHIC DATA, PARTICIPANT CHARACTERISTICS AND DIETARY INTAKE: Recruitment commenced in July 2009, with each participant followed up for the 4-month
duration of the interventions. Data collection was completed by September 2010. A total of
twenty-five participants were assigned randomly, with twelve allocated to the HRM dietary
intervention first and thirteen allocated to the HRM+HAMSB dietary intervention first.
However, two participants withdrew before the commencement of the intervention diets; one
due to unrelated medical problems and the other due to intolerance of the first rectal
biopsy. Approximately one-third of the participants on the trial diets reported increased
flatulence. Of the volunteers, ten (seven males and three females; mean age 62·1
(sem 1·8) years and mean body weight 79·8 (sem 5·6) kg) completed the
HRM intervention as the first diet period, while thirteen (ten males and three females;
age 62·7 (sem 1·7) years and body weight 82·4 (sem 3·5) kg) completed
the HRM+HAMSB intervention first.  Participants maintained consistent body weight, with mean weights of 77·1 (sem
6·4) and 82·8 (sem 3·3) kg after the HRM and HRM+HAMSB interventions,
respectively.  There was no difference between the diets for reported intake of energy, total and
saturated fat, total carbohydrates and sugar, starch, alcohol or total Fe intake (Table 1). Compared with their respective baseline
levels, protein intake was significantly increased by the HRM
(P< 0·05) and HRM+HAMSB (P< 0·01)
interventions. Fibre intake was decreased in the HRM group at week 4 compared with its
baseline level (P< 0·01). Fibre intake was significantly lower in
the HRM group than in the HRM+HAMSB group after 4 weeks (P< 0·01).
Fe intake from meat was significantly higher for the HRM and HRM+HAMSB interventions at
week 4 compared with their respective baseline levels
(P< 0·001).

BODY.RESULTS.RECTAL EPITHELIAL MEASURES: The O6MeG adduct load was increased at week 4 in the HRM group compared with
its baseline level (P< 0·01); however, the addition of HAMSB to
the HRM diet prevented this increase (Table 2).
Relative to their respective baseline levels, the number of PCNA-labelled cells in the
rectal epithelium increased for both the HRM (P< 0·001) and
HRM+HAMSB (P< 0·05) groups; however, the number was lower
following the HRM+HAMSB intervention than the HRM intervention
(P< 0·05; Table 2).

BODY.RESULTS.STOOL BIOCHEMISTRY: The results of the stool analyses are presented in Table 3. Stool output and pH did not differ significantly between the
treatments. Stool excretion of acetate, propionate, butyrate and total SCFA was higher in
the HRM+HAMSB group at 4 weeks compared with its baseline level
(P< 0·05) as was the stool concentrations of acetate, propionate
and total SCFA (P< 0·05). Faecal p-cresol
concentration was lower in the HRM+HAMSB group at 4 weeks compared with its baseline level
(P< 0·01) and the HRM group (P< 0·05).
Branched-chain fatty acids, phenols, NH3 and NOC were unaffected by the
treatment.

BODY.RESULTS.STOOL BACTERIA: Significant changes in stool bacteria in response to the diet are presented in Table 4. When the numbers of bacteria/g of stool were
examined, the HRM+HAMSB group at 4 weeks elicited an increase in the number of
Parabacteroides distasonis relative to its baseline level
(P< 0·0001) and the HRM group (P< 0·001).
Compared with its baseline level, HRM+HAMSB consumption increased the numbers of
Lactobacillus spp. (P< 0·01), the
Clostridium coccoides group (P< 0·05), the
Clostridium leptum group (P< 0·05) and
Ruminococcus bromii (P< 0·05), but lowered the
numbers of Ruminococcus torques (P< 0·05). When
bacterial numbers were expressed as a percentage of total bacteria, the proportion of
P. distasonis was increased by the consumption of the HRM+HAMSB diet at
4 weeks compared with its baseline level and the HRM group at 4 weeks (both
P< 0·0001). Lower proportions of Ruminococcus
gnavus (P< 0·01), R. torques
(P< 0·01) and E. coli
(P< 0·01) were evident in the HRM+HAMSB group at 4 weeks compared
with its baseline level. The HRM+HAMSB group also had lower proportions of R.
torques (P< 0·05) and E. coli
(P< 0·05) than the HRM group at 4 weeks. When the results of all
qPCR assays were combined and then analysed statistically to gain an indication of the
impacts of the treatments on microbial diversity, it was found that the microbial
diversity during the HRM+HAMSB intervention was different from that at baseline
(P< 0·05) and during the HRM intervention
(P< 0·01); however, the composition at baseline and the HRM
intervention did not differ.

BODY.DISCUSSION: Previously, we reported that feeding a diet rich in red meat to rodents can increase the
level of the pro-mutagenic DNA adduct (O6MeG) in the colon, whereas
co-consumption of a fermentable carbohydrate can reduce this effect(

8

). We have now shown that when free-living healthy human subjects consumed their
normal habitual diet containing at least an additional 300 g red meat over a 4-week period,
there was increased formation of the O6MeG adduct in the rectal epithelium. This
increase in adduct formation might account, in part, for the increased risk of CRC
associated with consuming high levels of red meat.  Studies in rodents have shown a positive correlation between cumulative O6MeG
levels and tumour load(

38

). This association is also supported, in humans, by the prevalence of higher
O6MeG levels in DNA isolated from the distal region of the colon, where most
sporadic CRC occurs(

39

). The present study is the first to report on the effect of feeding a HRM diet
to human subjects on the most predominant alkyl-induced DNA adduct O6MeG in the
rectal epithelial tissue. In a randomised cross-over study comparing HRM, vegetarian and
HRM/high-fibre diets, an increase in O6-carboxymethylguanine adduct levels was
observed in exfoliated colonic epithelial cells isolated from the faeces of healthy
volunteers consuming a HRM diet(

7

). However, the relevance of DNA adducts in exfoliated cells to the in
situ epithelial adduct load is unclear. Our findings show that such adducts do
form in cells residing within the crypt and, thus, have the potential to form mutated clones
that might progress to cancer.  The present study also confirms that dietary fermentable carbohydrate in the form of HAMSB
can protect against red meat-induced colorectal DNA lesions in humans, and is consistent
with epidemiological evidence that dietary fibre consumption reduces the risk of CRC. The
present study and our previous work in rodents(

8

,

18

,

21

,

40

) all point towards SCFA, particularly butyrate, to be the key mediators in
preventing meat-induced DNA adducts and DNA strand breaks in colonic mucosa. Butyrate is a
preferred metabolic substrate for colonocytes, and this SCFA has strong anti-tumorigenic
properties in vivo and in vitro
(

15

,

41

). In the present study, ingestion of HAMSB in conjunction with HRM was also able
to favourably influence the colonic luminal environment, as evidenced by increased levels of
SCFA and a reduction in the potentially toxic protein fermentation product
p-cresol. This elevation of faecal butyrate with HAMSB confirms previous
studies in human subjects(

20

,

42

), and has the potential to improve colonic health and offer protection against
CRC. Although consumption of a blend of types 2 and 3 RS in a recent human trial of
hereditary CRC failed to reduce tumour incidence(

43

), the relatively low daily intake of RS used in that study may have been
insufficient to increase SCFA levels in stool (which were not measured). At least 20 g of
RS/d may be needed to increase stool levels of SCFA(

44

,

45

).  A reasonable explanation for the increase in O6MeG adducts with the HRM
intervention is dietary haem. Haem is abundant in red meat, the majority of which derived
from the diet passes into the large bowel(

46

). We recently identified dietary haem as an agent that can increase
O6MeG adducts in the colon of mice(

35

). Haem Fe-rich meat has also been shown to increase alkylated DNA adducts in an
in vitro digestion system(

47

). Dietary haem may also increase the production of reactive oxygen species,
causing cellular toxicity and pro-mutagenic lesions(

48

,

49

). Other factors, such as bile acids(

50

), could also contribute to adduct formation and DNA damage more broadly. Haem
may also be responsible for the increased rectal cell proliferation in response to HRM and
HRM+HAMSB consumption, as evidenced by more PCNA-labelled cells/crypt. Haem is associated
with increased epithelial proliferation in the colon of rodents, and can injure the colonic
surface epithelium by generating cytotoxic and oxidative stress(

6

,

51

).  In the present study, we anticipated that NOC would increase in the stool of the
participants consuming the HRM diet, and that this would explain a higher O6MeG
adduct load. High dietary haem and red meat have previously been associated with increased
luminal NOC in humans(

24

,

27

,

52

). A dose–response relationship has been described between red meat intake and
faecal NOC: low faecal NOC (374 μg/kg) at low red meat intake (60 g/d) and a 4- or 5-fold
increase in faecal NOC with increased red meat intake of 240 and 420 g/d, respectively(

24

). Lewin et al.
(

7

) also observed an increase in faecal NOC in volunteers fed 420 g/d of red meat
in comparison with a vegetarian diet, and suggested that NOC are important genotoxins
involved in the generation of alkyl adducts(

7

). Although we observed an increase in the O6MeG adduct load with HRM
intake (300 g/d), we are unable to completely explain the lack of the effect of HRM on
faecal NOC. One possible explanation is that the other studies(

7

,

24

) had a very high level of control with the meals being consumed in an
experimental facility. In the present study, we only controlled for the amount of meat in
the diet so that other factors in the diet may account for the discrepancy.  There is growing recognition of both the importance of the large-bowel microbiota in human
health and the strong role of diet in modulating its composition and metabolic activities.
Using a suite of qPCR assays that targeted a range of bacteria important to gut health, we
demonstrated significant shifts in the composition of the gut microbiota in response to the
HRM+HAMSB, but not HRM, intervention. Our observation of an increase in the stool numbers of
the C. leptum group and R. bromii, a member of the
C. leptum group, in response to the consumption of RS as HAMSB is
consistent with the effects previously observed in human subjects and with the central role
that this bacterium appears to have in RS degradation(

53

–

55

). This increase provides further evidence (additional to the observed increase
in stool SCFA levels) that HAMSB was being consumed by the participants and was reaching the
large bowel where it was available for fermentation. The numbers of P.
distasonis were also increased by the HAMSB treatment, which is also consistent
with changes in humans following consumption of butyrylated RS(

20

). HAMSB is a chemically modified RS, and the forms of RS (classified as RS4)
have been shown to be more likely to stimulate the growth of P. distasonis
(

53

). In line with the HAMSB treatment, stool excretion of butyrate increased,
primarily from the release of the bound butyrate; however, the higher number of bacteria in
the C. coccoides group could also have contributed as a number of butyrate
producers are classified in that group.  When the numbers of bacteria were expressed as a proportion of total bacteria, the addition
of HAMSB to the diet also lowered the numbers of E. coli (a species with
enteropathogenic variants and potential), R. gnavus and R.
torques (numbers of which are high in the mucosa of some individuals with
inflammatory bowel disease)(

56

), supporting the potential of HAMSB to promote gut health. We did not observe
any clear indication of the effects of HRM on the composition of the gut microbiota.
However, the range of bacteria that we targeted is limited, and a more detailed analysis of
populations may reveal changes. This may give an insight into the mechanisms of HRM-induced
adduct formation and reasons for the associated increased risk of CRC. Furthermore,
in vitro experiments have demonstrated that the formation of alkylated
DNA adducts appear to depend on the microbial composition(

47

). The changes that we have observed support the idea that the increases in stool
SCFA levels and the associated protection against dietary HRM-mediated colorectal tissue
damage that have occurred in response to dietary RS treatment are at least partly mediated
by the gut microbiota, through both cleavage of the esterified butyrate and fermentation of
the RS substrate. Part of the protective effect may also be attributable to reducing numbers
and activities of bacteria with potential for harm.  A limitation of the present study was that the randomised cross-over design resulted in a
period effect for the primary end-point 'O6MeG adducts'. Participants allocated
the HRM+HAMSB intervention in the first period did not have a HRM-induced increase in
O6MeG adducts during the subsequent period. This contrasted with the increase
in adduct formation that occurred when HRM was consumed first. This suggests that the
consumption of HAMSB is able to protect against the damage caused by the HRM diet. We have
presented in detail the analyses of the data from the first period (results incorporating
both treatment periods are supplied in the online Supplementary material). Presentation of
the data from the first arm reduces the statistical power of the study compared with that of
the full cross-over. However, the primary end-point 'O6MeG' was still adequately
powered, and the effect of HAMSB on SCFA (especially butyrate) is magnified. A further
limitation of the study was that the right-sided colonic mucosa could not be evaluated, as
biopsies were only taken from the rectum. This limits the application of the results to
proximal colorectal carcinogenesis, particularly as genotypic differences between proximal
and distal cancers exist(

57

). More invasive studies are warranted to investigate whether the same effects
observed in the rectum occur in other regions of the large bowel.  In summary, our findings show that high dietary red meat intake has detrimental effects on
the colorectum by increasing pro-mutagenic DNA adducts and epithelial cell proliferation.
Conversely, increasing luminal butyrate levels with HAMSB prevented the accumulation of
O6MeG adducts. These findings might explain the increased risk for CRC
associated with HRM consumption, and could point to a beneficial effect of
butyrate-generating RS.