TITLE: The Influence of Exercise on an Unstable Surface on the Physical Function and
Muscle Strength of Patients with Osteoarthritis of the Knee

ABSTRACT 
  ABSTRACT: [Purpose] This study investigated the influence of exercise on an unstable surface on ROM
of the knee, muscle strength and the physical function of patients with osteoarthritis of
the knee. [Subjects] The subjects were 30 patients diagnosed with degenerative
osteoarthritis of the knee, they were divided into an experimental group (n=15) and a
control group (n=15). [Methods] The experimental group performed exercise using an aero
step XL (TOGU, Germany) 3 times a week, for 6 weeks. A control group performed the same
exercise on a stable surface and without aero step XL. [Results] After the intervention,
the experimental group showed statistically significant improvements in active knee
flexion, knee joint manual muscle test (MMT), knee joint MMT hamstring and WOMAC score.
[Conclusion] Exercise on the unstable surface improved the symptoms of patient with
osteoarthritis. Exercise on an unstable surface might be helpful for improving the muscle
strength and alignment of lower extremities as well as improving physical function related
to the knee joint.

BODY.INTRODUCTION: The growing number of old people has been recognized as a worldwide problem and the
incidence of chronic elderly patients is also on the rise. The elderly population forms 10%
of the general population in developed countries. The elderly population of South Korea rose
above 7% of the whole population in 2000, and has continued rising, passing 9.5% in 2006. It
is expected to be more than 20.8% in 2026, when South Korea will become a super-aged
society1).  Osteoarthritis is one of the most common disease causing disability and functional
problems. It is a clinically important disease which leads to limitation of joint range of
mition (ROM), muscle weakness and functional impairments. It is caused by damage to the
articular cartilage which affects weight bearing in activities of daily living (ADL) and
gait pattern2, 3).  Osteoarthritis of the knee is a kind of inflammatory disease of the articular surfaces and
it is caused by impairments and abrasion of articular cartilage. That is, it is caused by
mechanical and biological factors related to abnormality of the degenerative process
affecting the extracellular matrix and cartilage cells between articular cartilages4). Medication for the improvement of
functional ability is known to be effective for pain relief and improvement of symptoms, but
there is a possibility of side effects or overuse. Physical therapy for osteoarthritis
includes thermal therapy, photo therapy, electrotherapy, exercise therapy, and manual
therapy. These therapies can reduce pain and side effects as well as increase muscle
strength, endurance and coordination. Although medication and surgery are effective for pain
relief and improvement of symptoms, there is also the possibility of the side effects. For
this reason, physical therapy is often selected to treat osteoarthritis5).  Exercise therapy has recently become popular. It can improve the general function of the
body and activities of daily living by enhancing the range of motion (ROM) and muscle
strength of patients6). Moreover, it is an
effective way for physical therapists to manage osteoarthritis, aiming to stabilize the knee
joint and ADL7). This study investigated
the influence of exercise on an unstable surface on ROM of the knee, muscle strength and the
physical function of patients with osteoarthritis of the knee.

BODY.SUBJECTS AND METHODS.SUBJECTS: The subjects were 30 osteoarthritis patients randomly recruited at J orthopedic clinic
after diagnosis by doctors. The inclusion criteria were: an age over 60 years,
Kellgren-Lawrence (K/L) grade>2, not currently exercising, and ability to understand
the exercise. Subjects who had received surgery on the knee joint were excluded. The
subjects were randomly divided into two groups, an experimental group and a control group.
Approval for this research was obtained from the local Research Ethics Committee. This
experiment was conducted after explaining the contents and purpose of this study to the
subjects and receiving their consent.

BODY.SUBJECTS AND METHODS.METHODS: The experimental group performed exercises using an aero step XL (TOGU, Germany) 3 times
a week, for 6 weeks. The aero step was developed by TOGU and it is an effective tool for
promoting stability in rehabilitation. It can be used not only by patients with
musculoskeletal and central nervous system diseases, but also for body building and
fitness. It is about 8 cm in height and consists of two parts. It has been reported that
this equipment enhances balance, muscle strength, maintenance of posture, and flexibility
during exercises in the standing position8).  After setting up the unstable surface, the subjects were told to stand with their feet at
shoulder width on the aero step. Then, they flexed their knee joints, keeping their knees
vertically above their toes. After maintaining the flexed posture for 5–10 seconds, the
subjects were allowed to extend their knees and hip. This exercise was repeated in 3
one-minute sets, with a one-minute break between each set. Then, the subjects were
instructed to step on and off the aero step repeatedly and alternately with their lower
limbs in 3 one-minute sets with a 1-minute break between sets. The control group performed
the same exercises but on a stable surface without the aero step.  The manual muscle test (MMT) is a convenient tool for evaluating the muscle strength and
level of impairment. Muscle strength is rated from 0 to 5 according to the muscle
performance against resistance9).  This test is widely used because it is easy and simple to conduct. Agonist muscles are
the target of this test, and if there is any pain in the muscle, pain and compensatory
actions need to be eliminated10).  The ROM test is used to evaluate the mobility of patients limbs. It is used to determine
the range of motion without pain. In this study, a standard goniometer was used during the
active ROM test. To measure knee flexion, the stationary arm of the goniometer was placed
on the middle of the greater trochanter, and the moving arm was placed in line with the
lateral malleolus and the head of the fibula during active movement by the subjects. The
measurements were performed three times and the mean value was used for statistical
analysis11).  The Western Ontario and McMaster Universities (WOMAC) index is widely used to evaluate
the physical function of pelvic and knee osteoarthritis cases. It is a very effective tool
for the measurement of clinical change and joint condition12). This tool evaluates the problems with ADL caused by abnormal
symptoms in patients with osteoarthritis, and has three item: pain, rigidity and physical
function. The Korean-WOMAC Index, which has been modified for Korean lifestyles, was used
in this study. The K-WOMAC Index is divided into sub-items of pain, rigidity and physical
function. A higher score indicates more difficulty with ADL, and a lower score indicates
easier performance of ADL. Subjects were given a score of 1 to 5 according to their
performance and the mean value was used for statistical analysis in this study13).  SPSS for Windows (version 20.0) was used for statistical analysis in this study. To
investigate the general characteristics of subjects, the χ2 test and the
independent t-test were used. The paired t-test was used to evaluate the changes between
before and after the intervention in both the experimental and control groups. For
comparison of the pretest-posttest changes in values between the experimental and control
groups, the independent t-test was used with a significance level of 0.05.

BODY.RESULTS: There were no significant differences in the general characteristics of the experimental
and control groups (p>0.05) (Table
1Table 1.General characteristics of the subjects (Mean±SD)Experimental group (n=15)Control group (n=15)Age (year)64.9±6.863.7±5.6Weight (kg)60.6±9.760.3±9.5Height (cm)155.5±6.4154.2±7.1History (month)72.9±13.475.7±25.7Gender (M/F)7/85/10).  The pre-test and post-test values of the experimental group showed statistically
significant differences in active knee flexion, knee joint MMT, knee joint MMT hamstring and
WOMAC score (p<0.05) (Table 2Table 2.Comparison of angle, MMT, and K-WOMAC in the experimental group (Mean±SD)Pre-test (n=15)Post-test (n=15)Active knee flexion*111.33±6.67112.66±6.23Knee joint MMT quadriceps*2.80±0.414.53±0.52Knee joint MMT hamstring*2.93±0.264.13±0.52K-WOMAC score*17.98±4.0713.68±3.19*p<0.05, Knee flexion (angle°), MMT=Manual muscle test, MMT score, K-WOMAC =
Korean-Western Ontario and McMaster Universities osteoarthritis index score  The pre-test and post-test values of the control group showed statistically significant
differences in the knee joint MMT, and knee joint MMT (hamstring) and WOMAC score
(p<0.05) (Table 3Table 3.Comparison of angle, MMT, and K-WOMAC in control group (Mean±SD)Pre-test (n=15)Post-test (n=15)Active knee flexion110.00±7.56110.80±6.05Knee joint MMT quadriceps*2.80±0.413.86±0.64Knee joint MMT hamstring*2.73±0.463.80±0.68K-WOMAC score*18.00±4.6216.67±3.75*p<0.05, Knee flexion (angle°), MMT=Manual muscle test, MMT score, K-WOMAC =
Korean-Western Ontario and McMaster Universities osteoarthritis index score  The independent samples t-test the experimental and control groups in the pretest-posttest
changes in the knee joint MMT and WOMAC score (p<0.05) (Table 4Table 4.Comparison of the improvements shown by the experimental and control groups
(Mean±SD) (Unit: )Experimental group (n=15)Control group (n=15)Active knee flexion−1.33±2.29−0.80±2.70Knee joint MMT quadriceps*−1.73±0.46−1.06±0.59Knee joint MMT hamstring−1.20±0.56−1.06±0.96WOMAC score*4.30±1.571.33±1.56*p<0.05, Knee flexion (angle°), MMT=Manual muscle test, MMT score, K-WOMAC =
Korean-Western Ontario and McMaster Universities osteoarthritis index score

BODY.DISCUSSION: This study investigated the influence of exercises on stable and unstable surfaces on the
knee joint ROM, physical function and muscle strength of patients with osteoarthritis of the
knee.  Of the many movements of the body needed for ADL, the movements of the lower extremities
are related to gait performance. Especially, knee joint movement is involved in many
activities of daily living. For this reason, osteoarthritis commonly occurs in the knee and
pelvic joints which are responsible for weight bearing14). The target population of this study was elderly persons with
osteoarthritis, especially of the knee joint. If there is a problem in the knee joint, gait
is easily impaired in activities of daily living such as stair-climbing, sit-to-stand and
standing15).  The lower limb strength of patients with early phase osteoarthritis is known to be weaker
than that of women without any disease. Cartilage problems in the early phase of
osteoarthritis being with weakness in the lower extremities, and ultimately result in pain.
It is reported that intervention for the improvement of lower muscle strength in early
osteoarthritis is successful at minimizing and preventing decrease of body function and
muscle weakness16).  Many therapists have studied the effects of manual therapy and exercise therapy on pain and
functional impairment in adults with osteoarthritis of the pelvis or knee17). According to those studies, exercise
therapy not only increased or maintained muscle strength, but also improved ROM and
flexibility of the joint. In addition, it has also been reported that nutrition supplied to
the joints prevented impairment, resulting in the maintenance of body function18).  Lee19) suggested that exercise on an aero
step is an effective at enhancing muscle strength because it facilitates the somatosensory,
vestibular and visual systems, related to maintaining the posture, without stressing the
patients. Moreover, it was found in a previous study, that the muscle strengths of the ankle
and knee joints were increased after exercise on an unstable surface20). Based on these results, we consider that exercise on an
unstable surface has a positive effect on the body function and muscle strength of patients
with osteoarthritis.  In a previous study of the long-term effects of exercise, it was found that the
effectiveness of exercise on pain and physical function decreased with time after the
training period. This indicates the need to investigate the long-term effects of exercise.
Thus, recent studies have emphasized the importance of methods for maintaining a healthy
state21), and have investigated the
relationships among pain, physical function and self-awareness of patients22).  Exercise therapy has a positive effect on osteoarthritis which decreases by with time,
ultimately disappearing. Thus, future studies need to focus on finding better ways to decide
the optimal exercise period for lasting effectiveness.  This study had several limitations. The number of subjects was relatively small, thus, it
is difficult to generalize the results. Furthermore, 6 weeks is a relatively short period
for evaluating the long-term effects of exercise. Thus, studies focusing on the long-term
effects to evaluate the relationship between the results and clinical application, are
needed.  Exercise using unstable surface improved the symptoms of patient with osteoarthritis but it
was not significant between groups. We think that exercise on an unstable surface might be
helpful for improving the muscle strength and alignment of the lower extremities as well as
positively affecting physical function related to the knee joint. Further studies to develop
advanced exercise programs will be needed.