TITLE: Cross-year peer tutoring on internal medicine wards: results of a qualitative focus group analysis

ABSTRACT 
ABSTRACT.BACKGROUND: Peer-assisted learning (PAL) has become a well-accepted teaching method within medical education. However, descriptions of on-ward PAL programs are rare. A focus group analysis of a newly established PAL program on an internal medicine ward was conducted to provide insights into PAL teaching from a student perspective.

ABSTRACT.PURPOSE: To provide insights into students' experiences regarding their on-ward training with and without accompanying PAL tutors.

ABSTRACT.METHODS: A total of N=168 medical students in their sixth semester participated in the investigation (intervention group: N=88; control group: N=80). The intervention group took part in the PAL program, while the control group received standard on-ward training. There were seven focus groups with N=43 participants (intervention group: four focus groups, N=28 participants; control group: three focus groups, N=15 participants). The discussions were analyzed using content analysis.

ABSTRACT.RESULTS: The intervention group emphasized the role of the tutors as competent and well-trained teachers, most beneficial in supervising clinical skills. Tutors motivate students, help them to integrate into the ward team, and provide a non-fear-based working relationship whereby students' anxiety regarding working on ward decreases. The control group had to rely on autodidactic learning strategies when neither supervising physicians nor final-year students were available.

ABSTRACT.CONCLUSION: On-ward PAL programs represent a particularly valuable tool for students' support in training clinical competencies on ward. The tutor–student working alliance acts through its flat hierarchy. Nevertheless, tutors cannot represent an adequate substitute for experienced physicians.  ABSTRACT.BACKGROUND: Peer-assisted learning (PAL) has become a well-accepted teaching method within medical education. However, descriptions of on-ward PAL programs are rare. A focus group analysis of a newly established PAL program on an internal medicine ward was conducted to provide insights into PAL teaching from a student perspective.

ABSTRACT.PURPOSE: To provide insights into students' experiences regarding their on-ward training with and without accompanying PAL tutors.

ABSTRACT.METHODS: A total of N=168 medical students in their sixth semester participated in the investigation (intervention group: N=88; control group: N=80). The intervention group took part in the PAL program, while the control group received standard on-ward training. There were seven focus groups with N=43 participants (intervention group: four focus groups, N=28 participants; control group: three focus groups, N=15 participants). The discussions were analyzed using content analysis.

ABSTRACT.RESULTS: The intervention group emphasized the role of the tutors as competent and well-trained teachers, most beneficial in supervising clinical skills. Tutors motivate students, help them to integrate into the ward team, and provide a non-fear-based working relationship whereby students' anxiety regarding working on ward decreases. The control group had to rely on autodidactic learning strategies when neither supervising physicians nor final-year students were available.

ABSTRACT.CONCLUSION: On-ward PAL programs represent a particularly valuable tool for students' support in training clinical competencies on ward. The tutor–student working alliance acts through its flat hierarchy. Nevertheless, tutors cannot represent an adequate substitute for experienced physicians.

BODY.BACKGROUND: Peer-assisted learning (PAL) has become an established and well-accepted teaching method in medical education,1,2 which offers a variety of advantages both for learners2 and for peer tutors.3,4 PAL is a voluntary relationship between the tutor and the trainee that provides challenge, growth, and motivation to develop professional, collegial skills. This relationship is multifaceted; tutors take on the roles of advisor, advocate, teacher, active listener, and friend.5 In this respect, PAL encompasses the opportunity to encourage more positive attitudes towards learning and may increase the students' enthusiasm for learning in general.2,6 Since student tutors have had the same learning experiences, they are able to understand why the trainees may have difficulties.2 One of the major benefits of PAL is the informality that junior students feel towards more senior students. This informality allows students to raise areas of concern without feeling foolish or concerned about ridicule due to a lack of knowledge or understanding.7 This teaching approach likewise brings advantages for the tutor. Tutors can develop their teaching skills8 or assist students in obtaining a greater understanding of the topics they are teaching.6  Positive effects of PAL programs have been demonstrated in controlled studies in the fields of gross anatomy,9 problem-based learning,10 communication skills training,11 clinical examination,12 and resuscitation training.13 For the teaching of clinical technical skills, Tolsgaard et al14 and Weyrich et al15 demonstrated that trained student tutors can be equally as effective as associate professors. Despite these promising results, the differential effects that account for the effectiveness of PAL programs in training clinical skills remain largely in the dark. Moreover, descriptions and evaluations of PAL programs on ward/at the bedside for clinical skills training are rare.  Nikendei et al16,17 implemented a cross-year PAL on-ward program at the Medical Hospital of the University of Heidelberg (Heidelberg, Germany) for medical students in their third year of training as part of a randomized controlled trial. This program was developed in line with recommendations made by Wadoodi and Crosby7 and Ross and Cameron,18 and included ten patient-centered tutorials. The evaluation of the on-ward PAL program showed high acceptance ratings by both medical students and PAL tutors. Trainees reported that they felt significantly more integrated on the wards and experienced less anxiety concerning future on-ward work as a medical doctor compared to controls.17 Furthermore, self-assessed competencies of the trainees improved significantly in skills exclusively trained in the PAL program. Peer tutors acknowledged that participating in the course increased their basic clinical skills and enhanced their personal teaching skills. Alford and Currie19 described an educational on-ward intervention in which first-year medical students shadowed experienced medical students performing routine clinical duties for 1 day in every 6 weeks over a period of 1 year. The qualitative analysis revealed that through this learning approach, the students gained important insights into the everyday practice of medicine. However, their on-ward intervention cannot be referred to as PAL training in the strict sense, because the tutors were not trained to apply defined didactic methods and to realize clearly defined learning objectives. The investigation by Alford and Currie19 also fails to fulfil basic methodological requirements. They did not provide any information about the sample size or the approach of qualitative analysis chosen, and the study design did not include a control group.  In the field of PAL research, the presented study is the first qualitative investigation of trainees' experiences of a PAL program on internal medicine wards. To elucidate underlying causalities behind the results of Nikendei et al,16,17 a focus group analysis was conducted to provide further insights into PAL teaching on ward from a student perspective.

BODY.METHODS.SAMPLE: N=168 medical students in their sixth semester voluntarily participated in the investigation. The students were allocated to one of 14 wards at the Medical University Hospital of Heidelberg for 5 weeks. The wards were divided into two comparable groups of seven intervention wards with tutors and seven control wards without tutors. The students were randomly assigned to either an intervention or a control ward. The intervention group (n=88) was composed of 51 female and 37 male students (mean age 23.6 years). The size of the different tutorials ranged from three to eight students. The control group (n=80) was composed of 58 female and 22 male students (mean age 23.2 years). From the student sample, seven focus groups encompassing 43 voluntary participants (intervention group: four focus groups with a total of 28 participants; control group: three focus groups with a total of 15 participants) were formed. Further details are displayed in Table 1.  N=14 final-year medical students (eight females; six males; mean age 26.2 years) volunteered to serve as tutors. They participated in a 6-hour PAL training course, which included specific content of internal medicine, feedback training, and didactic methods to apply as a PAL tutor. The course was led by an experienced clinical educator in internal medicine and consisted of lectures, role plays, training related to on-ward topics, and discussion about difficult situations in PAL courses. In addition, the tutors received a tutor manual. Furthermore, a weekly meeting with a consultant was held in order to discuss upcoming problems during the PAL courses, organizational issues, and to prepare for the next courses. The tutors were recompensed with 150 Euro for their participation. At the time of the study, untrained final-year students were also working on the control wards.

BODY.METHODS.PAL ON-WARD PROGRAM: The PAL on-ward program included patient-centered tutorials (duration: 1.5 hours each) held twice a week by the tutors on the intervention wards. The learning objectives focused on the following clinical skills: history taking, developing a patient-centered attitude, physical examinations, drawing blood/applying indwelling catheters, infusion/blood transfusion, completing patient files, electrocardiogram writing, and chart rounds.16 The tutorials primarily took place at the bedside.

BODY.METHODS.INTERNAL MEDICINE CURRICULUM AT THE UNIVERSITY OF HEIDELBERG: On-ward, medical students in both the intervention group and the control group had to achieve a total of 50 credit points within a credit scoring system (eg, application of indwelling catheter = one point) over the course of the semester. In addition to their on-ward activities, all students attended symptom-oriented lectures, daily small-group seminars for internal medicine subspecialties, lessons in problem-based learning,20 skills lab training,21 and communication training with standardized patients.22

BODY.METHODS.FOCUS GROUP INTERVIEWS: The aim of the focus group interviews was to explore the subjective perception, judgment, and experience of medical students with regard to their on-ward training with (intervention group) and without (control group) PAL teaching.23,24 The number of focus groups resulted from a content saturation in the discussions, ie, for the generation of new content aspects, a new focus group was opened until the content saturation point was reached.25 The groups were composed as shown in Table 1. Each focus group discussion was based on the following "question route":  The discussions were recorded and subsequently transcribed.

BODY.METHODS.ANALYSIS OF THE TRANSCRIPTS: After transcribing the audio files of the peer tutor interviews verbatim, a qualitative content analysis was performed following the principles of grounded theory. First, an open coding of all of the interview transcriptions was conducted line by line. In detail, single or few sentences were identified as a code, representing the most elemental unit of meaning. Next, the codes were summarized into relevant themes for each participant, using the software MAXQDA (2010 version; VERBI GmbH, Berlin, Germany). As themes were recurrent among different participants, themes were then compared and adapted until relevant themes for all participants could be defined. The assignment of respective codes to specific themes was conducted by two independent analyzers and subsequently discussed to reach consensus and, if required, adjusted. The analyzers (SA and CN) both have expertise in qualitative research and are also certified skills lab trainers. In a final step, themes were consolidated into relevant categories.

BODY.METHODS.ETHICS: The ultimate goal of the study was curriculum improvement. Consequently, the ethics committee of the University of Heidelberg waived the requirement for an ethical approval procedure for the above described study design. The study was conducted in accordance to the Declaration of Helsinki (revised form, Seoul, 2008). All participants gave written informed consent. Study participation was voluntary.

BODY.RESULTS.MAIN CATEGORIES AND TOPICS: Within the structured focus group discussions, a total of 480 relevant individual statements were detected (intervention group: 201 individual statements; control group: 279 individual statements). From these, main categories were derived for the intervention group (on-ward training with PAL tutor) for trainees and for the control group (on-ward training without PAL tutor):

BODY.RESULTS.INTERVENTION GROUP: Within the main two categories of the intervention group, a total of 14 subtopics were identified. These are defined in the following sections.

BODY.RESULTS.CONTROL GROUP: Within the two main categories of the control group, a total of nine subtopics were identified. These are defined in the following sections.

BODY.DISCUSSION: The current qualitative study allows an indepth analysis of a PAL program for undergraduate medical students on internal medicine wards with final-year students serving as peer tutors. The focus groups shed light on the role of the tutor and the makings of a successful tutor–trainee relationship. Regarding the role of the ward physicians, positive and negative aspects of the physician–student working alliance were detected. Furthermore, the presented on-ward PAL program shows an effective structuring for workplace learning – a key challenge of clinical rotations.  In the presented PAL on-ward program, trainees perceived tutors as competent and well-trained teachers, most beneficial in supervising clinical skills. The results confirm the findings of quantitative studies using controlled designs that demonstrated professional competence of PAL tutors in terms of instructing and training clinical–technical skills in different fields of medicine.9,11,13–15,26,27 Additionally, the focus groups revealed that on-ward PAL tutors provide orientation and facilitate students' integration on ward. These results are in line with a quantitative evaluation of the described program emphasizing the importance of the PAL tutor as teacher, contact person, and integration figure.28 But most importantly, qualitative results show that PAL tutors motivate the students and help them to develop self-assurance, which might explain the reduction of students' anxiety regarding working on ward. This was also detected in previous research.17 The reduction of anxiety might be crucial for students in order to have the courage to assume independent patient management – one of the most central learning goals of workplace learning. All of these aspects constitute important characteristics of the tutor–trainee working alliance and have been shown to be likewise relevant for other areas of work in the medical field.5  To the authors' surprise, in this qualitative analysis, the physician–student relationship was only marginally mentioned by the intervention group. This is all the more astonishing as an accompanying quantitative evaluation showed better integration on ward for the intervention group than for the control group.17 However, students' reports on their on-ward experience revealed that 68% of the control group had contact with the ward physician versus only 40% of the intervention group (unpublished data). This is an alarming finding, as clinical rotations cannot only rely on PAL programs. Trainees on ward need experienced physicians to deliver higher level competencies such as clinical reasoning skills. Clinical reasoning expertise and professionalism evolve through repetitive practical experience and case-based reflection, as it has been described in the literature.29–32 Experienced members of the postgraduate staff serve as models for professionalism33 and are competent coaches for case-based reflections.34 Student–physician training is therefore definitively necessary to develop medical expertise. In line with this fact, the control group does emphasize the role of the ward physicians and senior physicians for their learning success. There is a need for a respectful, supportive physician–student relationship that is not based on fear. The students' preexisting clinical competence level should be properly recognized by the physicians. Here, an important interplay between ward physicians and tutors could be established, in which students benefit from ward physicians' clinical experience. Student tutors, on the other hand, represent an important link between ward physicians and students based on their competence to integrate and due to the flat hierarchy between students and tutors, which is not based on fear. Otherwise, students – as shown by the control group – have to completely reply on ward physicians' or the nursing staff's willingness to integrate them into the ward team. As the control group reports, if students do not have sufficient contact either with ward physicians or with final-year students, they are left on their own and are forced to follow autodidactic learning strategies.  Overall, the current study shows the multiple benefits of a PAL program to structure workplace learning on ward. Structuring of clinical placements represents a serious challenge in medical education. Literature shows that clinical rotations are seen more or less as a black box that conveys a trial-and-error method35 and fails to provide explicit learning objectives, defined responsibilities, and structured supervision.36–39 Most importantly, the PAL on-ward program could be supportive for independent patient management by reducing the anxiety regarding working on ward – which means achieving one of the most important clinical learning objectives. The authors assume that on-ward PAL programs have the potential to structure clinical rotations, an essential prerequisite for successful learning experiences of students on ward.  A limitation of this study is that a selection bias for the interviewed students may have occurred, as only voluntarily participating students took part in the focus group interviews. However, four focus groups were conducted for the intervention group, and three focus groups for the control group, with a total of 43 participants. As the number of focus groups depended on a content saturation in the discussions, ie, for the generation of new content aspects, a new focus group was opened until the content saturation point was reached,25 it is assumed that most of the relevant students' experiences were depicted by this qualitative approach. Students' individual subjective experiences may overshadow more representative aspects from a quantitative perspective. Nevertheless, the accompanying evaluation16 showed a high concordance with the qualitative results presented in this study. Qualitative research allows a more indepth analysis of on-ward learning experiences.

BODY.CONCLUSION: Statements by the interviewed students point toward the PAL program being a valuable tool for supporting them in the training of clinical competencies on ward, given that a suitable structure, successful integration into the ward team, and student supervision is rare. The essence of the student–tutor relationship observed in other fields of education is confirmed for PAL on-ward programs. Nevertheless, it is crucial to develop physician–student working alliances on ward, as an on-ward PAL program cannot represent a substitute of equal worth. Further research is needed to confirm and clarify how PAL tutors should be trained to fulfil their teaching role in an adequate manner and which components make PAL on-ward training most effective.