TITLE: Isokinetic Training Effect of Ankle Positions on Knee Extensor
Strength

  ABSTRACT:
[Purpose] The purpose of this study was to determine which ankle position most influences
knee extensor strength in training programs for strengthening the knee extensors using
three different active ankle positions. [Subjects] Twenty-one healthy adults (6 males and
15 females) participated in this study. [Methods] Subjects were trained isokinetically in
knee extension and flexion at 70 or 80% of 1RM under three actively and naturally fixed,
contracted ankle conditions: dorsiflexion, plantarflexion, and resting position. After
each group successfully executed the training four times a week for three weeks, mean peak
torque (PT) and total work (TW) variables were measured and compared at 60°/sec and
180°/sec among the three groups. [Results] Significant differences were revealed in knee
extensor TW at 60°/sec, PT and TW at 180°/sec, with the greatest PT and TW observed with
the ankle in active dorsiflexion position. [Conclusion] These results suggest that active
ankle dorsiflexion in a knee strength training program may be more effective at increasing
knee extensor strength than a resting or plantarflexion position.

BODY.INTRODUCTION:
Isokinetic clinical training and evaluation methods are often used as a reinforcement
technique for strengthening the musculature around the knee or as a muscle strength
assessment for subjects with knee impairment1, 2). Isokinetic exercise for strengthening the
knee extensor is also a commonly used method in rehabilitation3,4,5).  Isolated knee or single joint practice and testing without considering interactions of
multiple joints is undesirable in some pathological conditions of the knee joint6). Previous studies7, 8) have reported that
patellofemoral stresses during single joint testing are reduced by using a multi-joint leg
press exercise, and the training effect of the multi-joint system is more effective than
isolated joint exercise in restoring the function of patients with patellofemoral
dysfunction. In addition, Tepperman et al.9) reported that maximum isometric electromyographic activity of the
quadriceps during active ankle dorsiflexion is greater than that with the ankle in a neutral
position. However, all of these previous studies only assessed knee strength during the
isokinetic or isometric mode of testing and did not examine the effect of ankle position
during knee isokinetic exercise on knee strength. Therefore, this study was designed to
investigate whether or not fixed ankle positions (dorsiflexion, resting, plantarflexion) in
the isokinetic exercise of knee flexion and extension influence knee extensor strength, and
in the event of positive results, to determine which ankle position facilitated the greatest
increase in strength.

BODY.SUBJECTS AND METHODS:
Twenty-three healthy subjects volunteered for this study. Subjects were excluded if they
had any significant neurological or cardiopulmonary diseases, lower extremity joint
arthritis or fracture, or any limitation to ankle range of motion. Twenty-one subjects (6
males, 15 females; age 23±2.2 years) met the criteria. All participants had normal ankle
range of motion (approximately ankle dorsiflexion 0–30 and plantarflexion 0–45) and were
informed of the purpose of this study, instructed about the experimental procedure, and
asked to sign an informed consent prior to their participation in this experiment. The
subjects were randomly divided into three different groups each with a different ankle
position: dorsiflexion, resting, and plantarflexion.  A Biodex® system 3 Pro isokinetic dynamometer (Biodex, Inc., Shirley, NY, USA)
was used to train knee strength and measure the peak torque (PT) and total work (TW) during
unilateral knee flexion and extension movements. The standardized training took place for
three consecutive weeks, four days per week. The dominant leg was determined by asking each
subject which leg they mostly used to kick a ball. On training days, each group successfully
completed an exercise program of 5 sets of 10 repetitions of knee extension and 10
repetitions of knee flexion with the ankle in maximal active dorsiflexion, plantarflexion,
or the resting position according to the experimental group to which they were assigned. The
entire training mode was planned for concentric contraction at 70~80% of 1RM10). All subjects were allowed a 2-minute rest
period between each set and were instructed to abort the training if they felt any
discomfort or pain.  The angular velocities used for testing were 60°/s and 180°/s. Following a five-minute
sub-maximal warm-up on a stationary cycle, and 2–3 sub-maximal and maximal familiarization
repetitions, each subject performed five maximal-effort reciprocal contractions of the knee
extension muscle group, followed by five maximal-effort reciprocal contractions of knee
flexion muscle group. To minimize the error of measurement and equalize the ankle position
between pre- and post-training for the test, all the participants wore an ankle-foot
stabilizer fitted in the neutral ankle position (anatomically 0°). All the testing and
training began with active extension from 90 degrees of knee flexion. All post-test data
acquisition was performed using the Biodex Advantage Software package for
Windows®.  Before and after the three weeks of training, data for the dependent variables, PT and TW,
at 60°/s and 180°/s speed were collected for the three different ankle positioning groups
for analysis. After testing the normality of the data, one-way analysis of variance or the
Kruskal-Wallis Htest and the Mann-Whitney Utest were performed for between-group comparisons
of both demographic data and the pre- and post-training mean differences of the dependent
variables among the training groups. The significance level was chosen as 0.05.

BODY.RESULTS:
The comparison of sex, age, height, weight, and dominant side among the three groups
revealed no significant differences among the groups in their demographic characteristics
(Table 1Table 1.General characteristics of the subjectsVariableDG (n=7) RPG (n=7)PG (n=7) Sex (male/female)2/53/43/4Age (years)22.7±1.923.9±2.322.9±1.9Height (cm)164.7±5.9167.1±7.5166.6±7.5Weight (kg)52.9±8.257.0±11.957.3±9.0DS (right/left)4/37/06/1Values are expressed as frequency or mean ± SD.

BODY.DISCUSSION:
The purpose of this study was to analyze the effect of different ankle positions in
isokinetic knee extensor strength exercises after three weeks of isokinetic training, and to
determine which ankle position most effectively increased knee extensor strength.  In this study, we found that active ankle dorsiflexion during repetitive knee extension and
flexion at both 60°/s and 180°/sec in the isokinetic mode had the greatest impact on
increasing knee extensor strength compared to active ankle plantar flexion and the resting
ankle position. TW at 60°/s, PT and TW at 180°/s increased by 30%, 50% and 69%,
respectively, following knee training with the ankle in active dorsiflexion. A possible
explanation of these results is that increase in knee extensor strength may balance the
mechanical responses around the knee joint made by the tibialis anterior, and that active
ankle dorsiflexion facilitates knee extension more than other ankle positions.  This assumption is partly supported by the results of Dimitrijevic et al.11) who reported that voluntary isometric
contraction of the ankle dorsiflexors is accompanied by activation of the quadriceps and
other muscles of the lower extremity, usually in the same leg at first, and later in the
contralateral leg. In addition, our present results are consistent with those of Gough who
reported that the EMGs of the vastus medialis, vastus lateralis, and rectus femoris were
higher during ankle dorsiflexion12), and
are also consistent with Tepperman's9)
conclusion that the surface EMG activity of the quadriceps was facilitated more by active
ankle dorsiflexion or plantarflexion than by the natural (rest) position11).  The present study does have limitations that require consideration when interpreting the
results. First, the small sample size indicates the need for future studies with a larger
number of subjects. Second, this study trained only one side and made measurements at only
two angular velocities. Despite these limitations, the effect of ankle position on knee
extensor strength after three weeks of isokinetic training was demonstrated, a result which
is of clinical value in the strengthening of knee extensors. Future studies should address
these limitations and measure the effect of ankle position on knee strength using other
tools so the results can be generalized to healthy individuals as well as individuals with
knee injury.