TITLE: Healthy School, Happy School: Design and Protocol for a Randomized
Clinical Trial Designed to Prevent Weight Gain in Children

ABSTRACT 
ABSTRACT.BACKGROUND:: Schools have become a key figure for the promotion of health and obesity
interventions, bringing the development of critical awareness to the
construction and promotion of a healthy diet, physical activity, and the
monitoring of the nutritional status in childhood and adolescence.

ABSTRACT.OBJECTIVES:: To describe a study protocol to evaluate the effectiveness of an intervention
designed to improve knowledge of food choices in the school environment.

ABSTRACT.METHODS:: This is a cluster-randomized, parallel, two-arm study conducted in public
elementary and middle schools in Brazil. Participants will be children and
adolescents between the ages of 5 and 15 years, from both genders. The
interventions will be focusing on changes in lifestyle, physical activities
and nutritional education. Intervention activities will occur monthly in the
school's multimedia room or sports court. The control group arm will receive
usual recommendations by the school. The primary outcome variable will be
anthropometric measures, such as body mass index percentiles and levels of
physical activity by the International Physical Activity Questionnaire.

ABSTRACT.RESULTS:: We expect that after the study children will increase the ingestion of fresh
food, reduce excessive consumption of sugary and processed foods, and reduce
the hours of sedentary activities.

ABSTRACT.CONCLUSION:: The purpose of starting the dietary intervention at this stage of life is to
develop a knowledge that will enable for healthy choices, providing
opportunities for a better future for this population.  ABSTRACT.BACKGROUND:: Schools have become a key figure for the promotion of health and obesity
interventions, bringing the development of critical awareness to the
construction and promotion of a healthy diet, physical activity, and the
monitoring of the nutritional status in childhood and adolescence.

ABSTRACT.OBJECTIVES:: To describe a study protocol to evaluate the effectiveness of an intervention
designed to improve knowledge of food choices in the school environment.

ABSTRACT.METHODS:: This is a cluster-randomized, parallel, two-arm study conducted in public
elementary and middle schools in Brazil. Participants will be children and
adolescents between the ages of 5 and 15 years, from both genders. The
interventions will be focusing on changes in lifestyle, physical activities
and nutritional education. Intervention activities will occur monthly in the
school's multimedia room or sports court. The control group arm will receive
usual recommendations by the school. The primary outcome variable will be
anthropometric measures, such as body mass index percentiles and levels of
physical activity by the International Physical Activity Questionnaire.

ABSTRACT.RESULTS:: We expect that after the study children will increase the ingestion of fresh
food, reduce excessive consumption of sugary and processed foods, and reduce
the hours of sedentary activities.

ABSTRACT.CONCLUSION:: The purpose of starting the dietary intervention at this stage of life is to
develop a knowledge that will enable for healthy choices, providing
opportunities for a better future for this population.

BODY.INTRODUCTION: The increased prevalence of obesity and its complications reinforces the global need
for improved prevention strategies.1-3 In Brazil,
population-based surveys indicate that overweight was present in 6% of children
between 5 and 9 years in 1974-1975, rising steeply to 34.8% in 2008-2009.4 Globally, overweight in children
increased 47.1% over the past 20 years.5 In 2010, it was estimated that overweight and obesity were
responsible for 3.4 million deaths worldwide.6 Chronic diseases remain a public health challenge in Brazil.
The medical costs associated with diseases related to overweight and obesity are
substantial in Brazil, reaching nearly US$ 2.1 billion annually.7  Overweight in children and adolescents generates great concern because it is a risk
factor for the development of hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia
and other cardiovascular risk factors,8,9 which, if not
prevented or treated at an early age, tend to persist during adulthood.10  Nutritional intervention studies have shown a positive effect on preferences for
healthy foods and a decrease in daily consumption of sugary drinks.11,12 Permanent changes in diet quality, energy intake and
physical activity demand preventive actions.13 On that account, promotion of a healthy diet, physical
activity, and monitoring of the nutritional status in childhood and adolescence are
essential elements in public health. Being an educational environment that
contributes to build personal values, schools become a key figure for health
promotion and obesity interventions, bringing the development of critical awareness
to the construction and modification of eating habits.14,15  A number of international agencies, such as the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) and the Institute of Medicine (IOM), launched campaigns with
guidelines for health promotion in schools aiming to address the epidemic of obesity
and its consequences.16-18 In Brazil, the School Health
Program is designed to promote the comprehensive health care of public school
students and is structured in four blocks that seek to: assess health conditions;
perform actions of prevention and promotion of health conditions; promote continuing
education for professionals and the young; present evaluation and monitoring of
health conditions of the students. The responsibility for planning and carrying out
these actions is upon the primary care health team, and the objective is to
integrate the educational system and the Brazilian Unified Health System
(SUS).19 However, this
government action does not have coverage of all schools in the country yet.  In order to implement educational interventions in a large scale, it is important to
adequately test their effectiveness. It is also important to look for simple and
low-cost alternatives that can reach the largest possible number of schools.
Improving the knowledge about food choices may be an important basis for children to
acquire and maintain a healthy lifestyle from an early age, and possibly to sustain
these healthy habits in subsequent stages of life.  Thus, the purpose of this study protocol is to evaluate the effectiveness of an
intervention designed to improve knowledge of food choices in the school
environment.

BODY.METHODS: This protocol is reported according to the SPIRIT (Standard Protocol Items:
Recommendations for Interventional Trials) statement.

BODY.METHODS.STUDY DESIGN.OVERVIEW: This is a cluster-randomized parallel two-arm study conducted in Brazil. The
units of observation are individual children, and the units of randomization
are schools. Randomization will be performed at the school level to avoid
contamination. After the baseline assessment, enrolled schools are
randomized to one of two study arms: the intervention arm focusing on
changes in lifestyle, and the control group arm, that receives usual
recommendations by the health care team. A summary of the study design,
interventions and timelines is shown in Figure
1.  Flowchart of the study phases (enrolment, intervention
allocation, and fnal assessments).  The primary outcome for the participants is change in body mass index (BMI =
kg/m2), and the secondary outcomes are behaviors related to
healthy eating, increased preferences for fruits and vegetables, increased
physical activity and reduced screen time. The Institutional Research Ethics
Committee approved the protocol for the study, which is registered in the
Brazilian Registry of Clinical Trials, Register Number RBR-97bztb, and named
"Intervention program for health promotion in schools of public elementary
school in the state of Rio Grande do Sul: randomized clinical study". The
Universal Trial Number of this study is U1111-1155-7731.

BODY.METHODS.STUDY DESIGN.INCLUSION CRITERIA: Children between the ages of 5 and 15 years, from both genders, enrolled in
the public schools participating in this study, attending from the 1st to
the 9th grades of the elementary and middle school will be eligible for the
study (Table 1). The child and
parent(s) or legal guardian(s) are required to sign the assent term and the
informed consent.   Table 1 Inclusion criteria and assessment methods. Inclusion criteria Assessment method Age 5-15 years In person screening Enrolled in one of the participant schools,
attending a course from the 1 st  to the
9 th  grade of the elementary and middle
school. Electronic school review Agreeing to participate in all the meetings of
the study In person screening 

BODY.METHODS.STUDY DESIGN.EXCLUSION CRITERIA: Children are excluded if they have conditions or other circumstances that
could interfere with participation in the measurements or the interventions
or if the parent does not give or is unable to give consent or the child
does not assent. Participants are also excluded if they do not complete
baseline assessments in 3 weeks.

BODY.METHODS.STUDY DESIGN.SCREENING AND RECRUITMENT: The screening and recruitment activities will be developed during the course
of 4 weeks. During the first week, the school electronic files of student
enrollment will be consulted to identify potential participants (the
eligibility criteria can be seen in Table
1). During the following two weeks, recruitment letters will be
sent to the student's guardians, with explanation of the study and attached
Informed Consent Form. During the fourth week, individuals who agree to
participate in the study will undergo anthropometric assessment, provided
that there is no impediment for physical evaluation.

BODY.METHODS.STUDY DESIGN.RANDOMIZATION: Cluster randomization will be performed with distribution of two schools for
the control group and two schools for the intervention group. A
biostatistician who does not have direct contact with study participants
will generate the random allocation sequences using a computerized random
number generator. After the inclusion of each cluster, the allocation of
that particular cluster will be provided to the study coordinator. Due to
the characteristics of the intervention, it is not possible to mask
participants or interventionists to group assignment. There will be no
crossover between study arms, but the intervention will be offered to the
control group at the end of the study, if proved to be effective.

BODY.METHODS.STUDY DESIGN.ASSESSMENTS: Measures are conducted at baseline (month one) and post-treatment (month
9).

BODY.METHODS.STUDY DESIGN.ANTHROPOMETRIC MEASURES: Weighing electronic scales with a maximum capacity of 150 kg and precision of
100 g, properly checked for tare weight, will be used for weight measures.
The individual will be weighted barefoot and wearing light clothes. A
metallic measuring tape with a capacity of 2 m/0.1 cm, set in an existing
flat wall in the room, will be used to measure height, with the individual
in the upright position, during maximum inspiration, barefoot and with empty
pockets. These data will be used for the following calculation of BMI,
obtained by weight, measured in kilograms, divided by the square of the
height, measured in meters (kg/m2). That will be calculated and
nutritional status will be classified, both using the Anthro
Plus software, according to the reference of the World Health
Organization (WHO) 2006/2007.

BODY.METHODS.STUDY DESIGN.DIETARY INTAKE: The collection of dietary data, referring to the eating habits of the
participants, will be assessed by a Food Frequency Questionnaire
(FFQ),20
previously validated for the study population, designed to collect
information on the frequency of food consumption and/or food groups for
further association with other study variables, such as lifestyle and
anthropometric measurements.

BODY.METHODS.STUDY DESIGN.PHYSICAL ACTIVITY: International Physical Activity Questionnaire (IPAQ)21,22 will be used for all ages to classify the level of
physical activity, in spite of the fact this instrument has being validated
only for adults and adolescents, since there is not yet a validated
questionnaire that can suit the needs of this study and adequately classify
physical activity levels in Brazilian children.

BODY.METHODS.STUDY DESIGN.SCREEN TIME: Screen time refers to the amount of time individuals spend in front of
television, video games and computer, and is considered to be a sedentary
activity. It will be measured by hours per day and number of days in the
week of screen time.

BODY.METHODS.STUDY DESIGN.KNOWLEDGE OF HEALTHY HABITS: The acquisition of knowledge about healthy habits will be evaluated through a
questionnaire validated for age,23 consisted of knowledge about food and healthy
activities in daily life.

BODY.METHODS.STUDY DESIGN.DEMOGRAPHICS MEASURES: During baseline assessment, parents will be asked about a series of
demographic data included in the Brazilian Economic Classification Criterion
by the Brazilian Association of Research Companies,24 which includes: age;
educational attainment of the family head; questions about household
appliances and other family properties; street paving and treated water in
the house.

BODY.METHODS.STUDY DESIGN.SAMPLE SIZE: The sample size was calculated to detect a difference in 0.2 kg/m2
on BMI, with a standard deviation of 0.05, statistical power of 90% and
alpha error of 0.05. An estimate of mean 19 kg/m2 is used as
obtained from our pilot study. A number of 99 participants per group was
estimated using these parameters. To compensate for losses, the sample size
will be increased by 10%.

BODY.METHODS.STUDY DESIGN.PLANNED DATA ANALYSES: Collected data will be entered and analyzed using the Statistical Package for
Social Sciences, version 17.0. Quantitative variables will be expressed as
mean and standard deviation in the presence of normal distribution or median
and interquartile range in the presence of asymmetric distribution.
Qualitative variables are expressed as absolute and relative
frequencies.  Adjusted analysis for primary and secondary outcomes will be performed using
generalized estimating equations (GEE). The comparison between secondary
outcomes will be performed using the nonparametric Wilcoxon test.  The level of significance for all tests will be 95% (α = 0.05) and
will follow the intention to treat principle. P-values will be reported up
to three decimal places with p-values < 0.005 reported as p < 0.005.
The outcomes will be evaluated by a blind adjudicator.

BODY.METHODS.STUDY DESIGN.INTERVENTIONISTS: The interventions in this study will be delivered by the nutritionists of the
Children and Adolescents Cardiovascular Prevention Group
(PREVINA),25
nutrition graduate students and health professional contributors employed by
the City Hall (psychologists, physical education teachers, nurses). All
interventionists will undergo extensive training on: intervention protocol;
overall intervention objectives, content and format; and specific
instructions for each intervention session.

BODY.METHODS.STUDY DESIGN.INTERVENTION DESCRIPTION: Intervention activities will occur monthly in the school multimedia room or
sports court (Table 2). All
activities will be offered in different school shifts and schedules so that
all students in all classes can participate.   Table 2 Description of intervention activities Intervention Type Description Moment Presentation of the program to students,
parents and teachers. Seminar A seminar approaching the following topics
will be conducted: epidemiological data on obesity and
noncommunicable disease risk factors; dyslipidemia tracking;
importance of school intervention; presentation of the
activities that will be developed during the school year;
reading and clarification of the Informed Consent Form. 1st Month Knowing what we eat. Seminar The seminar will succinctly address the
composition of food, approaching macronutrients, fibers and
food groups. As a task for the week, each class should study
the vitamins and prepare a poster on that topic during class
time. As a homework assignment, all students should create,
with the help of parents, a list of five fruits and six
vegetables they like to eat. Three of them should be cooked
vegetables and three of them raw vegetables. 2nd Month The importance of water. Seminar The seminar will address the importance of
water in our health and the consequences of high consumption
of sugary drinks. Soft drink consumption has increased in
recent decades in Latin America, and that is being referred
as a contributor to the population weight gain. Many schools
sell soft drinks in the cafeteria and some children end up
consuming them daily without parents' knowledge.The “Week
without soda” challenge will be launched, in which children,
parents and teachers will commit to spend a week without
drinking soft drinks, which will require the family
interaction and commitment for the accomplishment of the
goal. 3rd Month Revolution in the kitchen: first you taste, and
then you like it. Workshop The workshop aims to propose an interaction
among students, teachers, kitchen staff and the food.
Various whole foods (fruits, vegetables, breads, cakes,
cookies) will be placed on a table. Participants will be
blindfolded and will have to randomly taste a food, describe
their sensory characteristics and perceptions (whether it is
soft or hard, if it has good or bad smell, if they like it
or not) and try to guess what it is. After that,
participants will be invited to prepare their own snack with
some of the vegetables they planted earlier in the year,
according to their preferences. As homework assignment,
students will be asked to help parents to make the salad for
the family for a day, starting with the choice of food in
the supermarket. During class time, teachers, helped by a
nutritionist, will work on the dynamics of the traffic light
food, where the food is classified according to the colors
of the traffic light. Green represents foods we should eat
daily; yellow foods that can be eaten more than once a week,
but in moderation; and red are the forbidden foods to eat
daily, but which can be eaten on special occasions, like
parties or the weekend. There will also be a seminar for
parents in order to provide information and ideas for
preparation of healthy snacks for school lunches best suited
for the needs of children. 4th Month Let's Move! Physical Activity in all
moments! Seminar The seminar will address the importance of
physical activity in our health, and it will present the
physical activity programs that are available in the city.
Activity ideas to do either outdoors or at home, alone or in
groups, will be suggested. A challenge will be launched:
“one disconnected day”, in which students, parents and
teachers will be invited to reduce television and internet
time to only two hours for a day. Reducing sedentary
behaviors, such as spending too much time watching
television and using the computer, appears to contribute to
the reduction of daily calorie intake. Activity suggestions
will be given for that day. 5th Month Where does my food come from? Workshop The workshop will have the participation of a
city vegetable producer who will teach students how to plant
and take care of a small vegetable garden at school. In
addition, each student will receive seeds of green seasoning
(parsley) to plant in a little vase previously decorated
during arts education class. 6th Month Milk every day! Seminar The seminar will address the importance of
milk and dairy products in our diet and the recommended
amounts of ingestion. It will also address certain disorders
related to milk digestion, such as lactose intolerance and
allergy to cow's milk protein. 7th Month Bullying: we have to talk about it! Seminar A psychologist will conduct the seminar and
address the meaning of the theme, bullying types, and what
to do if you fall victim. There will be a special meeting
with teachers to answer questions. 8th Month German dances course Workshop It will be offered fortnightly lessons of
German dances in school during one school year. This course
also aims to rescue the traditions and culture of the city,
which was settled mostly by Germans. Ongoing activity during the year 

BODY.METHODS.STUDY DESIGN.USUAL CARE COMPARATOR: Participants randomized to the control group will not receive any guidance
during the study. Children will receive the usual care and recommendations
through the school and health authorities.  Should the intervention prove to be effective, at the end of the study, the
institutions allocated to the control group will receive all intervention
activities if they wish.

BODY.DISCUSSION: This randomized clinical trial is intended to help filling a gap in the literature
regarding simple, low-cost and effective interventions to deal with the epidemic of
obesity and overweight in developing countries. Numerous studies show that
overweight and obesity rates in the young in Latin America bring important economic
and health consequences.26 In
spite of the need for individual approaches for children who are already overweight
or obese, the international consensus is that prevention is the most realistic
approach and the best value for money.27 It is therefore necessary to develop preventive interventions
that can reach a larger number of children.  Facilitators and barriers for the development of healthy habits should be considered
when designing a childhood overweight program. Adaptation to local culture and
reality should also be a concern. One of the most important challenges of this study
will be changing the approach to nutrition and physical activity. On that account,
we designed interventions that include parents, teachers and students aimed at
creating a positive impact on the health of children and adolescents.  The young need appropriate information to make healthy choices and change their
sedentary behavior, but their parents and teachers are not always prepared to give
that information. Therefore, involvement of trained health professionals specialized
in the field is necessary in order to adequately provide that information. Given
that children are exposed to the environment we create for them and that in Brazil
they usually spend about 25 hours a week in school, it is important to design
actions that seek to improve the school environment and create a healthy growth
strategy.  The study also has some limitations, that must be addressed in future work. First,
there is a possibility of cross-contamination of participants in the two
intervention arms, since both interventions are delivered in a small city. Second,
the trial does not evaluate the pubertal maturation, whose changes may impact on the
body composition in childhood and early adolescence, such as weight gain in girls
and a decline of body fat in pubertal boys.  In conclusion, we have described the basic rationale and design of the ongoing
Healthy School, Happy School cluster-randomized trial. The study intervention aims
to increase the ingestion of fresh food, reduce excessive consumption of sugary and
processed foods, and reduce the hours of sedentary activities. The purpose of
starting the dietary intervention at this stage of life is to develop a knowledge
that will enable for healthy choices, providing opportunities for a better future
for this population.