TITLE: Bronchodilator efficacy of extrafine glycopyrronium bromide: the Glyco 2 study

ABSTRACT 
  ABSTRACT: An extrafine formulation of the long-acting muscarinic antagonist glycopyrronium bromide (GB) is in development for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), in combination with beclometasone dipropionate and formoterol fumarate – a "fixed triple". This two-part study was randomized, double blind, placebo controlled in patients with moderate-to-severe COPD: Part 1: single-dose escalation, GB 12.5, 25, 50, 100 or 200 μg versus placebo; Part 2: repeat-dose (7-day), four-period crossover, GB 12.5, 25 or 50 μg twice daily (BID) versus placebo, with an open-label extension in which all patients received tiotropium 18 μg once daily. On the morning of Day 8 in all five periods, patients also received formoterol 12 μg. In study Part 1, 27 patients were recruited. All GB doses significantly increased from baseline forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) area under the curve (AUC0–12h) and peak FEV1, with a trend toward greater efficacy with higher GB dose. All adverse events were mild–moderate in severity, with a lower incidence with GB than placebo and no evidence of a dose–response relationship. In study Part 2, of 38 patients recruited, 34 completed the study. Adjusted mean differences from placebo in 12 h trough FEV1 on Day 7 (primary) were 115, 142 and 136 mL for GB 12.5, 25 and 50 μg BID, respectively (all P<0.001). GB 25 and 50 μg BID were superior (P<0.05) to GB 12.5 μg BID for pre-dose morning FEV1 on Day 8. For this endpoint, GB 25 and 50 μg BID were also superior to tiotropium. Compared with Day 7, addition of formoterol significantly increased Day 8 FEV1 peak and AUC0–12h with all GB doses and placebo (all P<0.001). All adverse events were mild–moderate in severity and there was no indication of a dose-related relationship. This study provides initial evidence on bronchodilation, safety and pharmacokinetics of extrafine GB BID. Overall, the results suggest that GB 25 μg BID is the optimal dose in patients with COPD.

BODY.INTRODUCTION: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is characterized by persistent airflow limitation, with long-acting bronchodilators (muscarinic antagonists [LAMAs] or β2-agonists [LABAs]) central to maintenance treatment, either alone or in combination.1 LAMAs such as tiotropium have demonstrated efficacy in a range of measures, including lung function, exacerbations, dyspnea and health status.2–7 "Open" triple therapy, consisting of a LAMA in one inhaler and an inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) plus a LABA in a second, is often used in clinical practice, and is recommended as a treatment option for patients who have the highest level of symptoms and risk of future exacerbations.1 Clinical trials have shown a benefit for the addition of a LAMA to an ICS/LABA; in particular, the addition of the LAMA glycopyrronium to a LABA/ICS significantly improved lung function, health status and rescue medication use.8  An extrafine formulation of glycopyrronium bromide (GB) is in development for management of COPD, to be used in a pressurized metered dose inhaler (pMDI) in combination with the ICS beclometasone dipropionate (BDP) and the LABA formoterol fumarate (FF) – a "fixed triple". This combination has demonstrated improvements in lung function and exacerbation rates compared with BDP/FF9 and compared with tiotropium.10 The Phase II study described here was conducted as part of the development program of the BDP/FF/GB fixed triple. The overall aim of the study was to assess the bronchodilator efficacy of extrafine GB, to identify the optimal dose to be subsequently combined with BDP/FF. In addition, the effects of GB were compared to those of LAMA, tiotropium, and the additive bronchodilator effect of using formoterol with GB was also evaluated.

BODY.METHODS.PARTICIPANTS: The study recruited males and females, 40–75 years of age, with moderate to severe COPD, specifically with post-bronchodilator forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) 40%–80% predicted and FEV1/forced vital capacity ≤0.70. Eligible patients had reversibility ≥100 mL within 30–45 min after inhalation of ipratropium 80 μg and were current or ex-smokers with a smoking history of ≥10 pack-years. Exclusion criteria included: other significant lung diseases (such as asthma); a history of chronic or seasonal allergy; blood eosinophils >0.6×109/L; clinically relevant findings on physical examination or from laboratory or electrocardiogram (ECG) evaluations; or a respiratory tract infection 4 weeks prior to entry or hospitalization 6 weeks prior to entry. In addition, patients were excluded if they had significant 24 h Holter ECG abnormalities at screening (described in the Supplementary materials). All patients signed written informed consent for this study, and the study was approved by the local research ethics committee (North West – Greater Manchester Central, UK; Ref: 10/H1008/47). All the inclusion and exclusion criteria are given in the Supplementary materials. Patients who completed study Part 1 were eligible for study Part 2, provided they still met the inclusion and exclusion criteria.

BODY.METHODS.TRIAL DESIGN:  xmlns:ns0="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">The two-part study was randomized, double blind and placebo controlled (ClinicalTrials.gov registration: NCT01176903). Part 1 was a two-cohort, single-dose escalation design, with the dose escalated only if the safety and tolerability profile of the lower dose was acceptable. Cohort A was randomized to receive GB 12.5, 50 or 200 μg, via pMDI, or matching placebo; there were three treatment periods separated by washouts of ≥7 days. Cohort B was randomized to receive GB 25 or 100 μg or placebo in two treatment periods. Treatment sequences were defined to ensure a 10:2 ratio between GB and placebo in each period.  Part 2, which started only after a positive evaluation of safety data from Part 1, was repeat-dose, four-period crossover design, followed by an open-label extension period. In the first four (core) periods, patients were randomized to receive GB 12.5, 25 or 50 μg, or matching placebo, twice daily (BID) for 7 days (total daily doses of 25, 50 and 100 μg), with a further dose on the morning of Day 8. In the fifth (extension) period, all patients received tiotropium 18 μg once daily (OD) for 8 days, open-label via the manufacturer's single-dose dry powder inhaler. On the morning of Day 8 in all five treatment periods, patients also received a single dose of formoterol 12 μg via pMDI. Treatment periods were separated by a 7±2 day washout.  Patients were assigned to treatment sequences according to randomization lists prepared by the study sponsor. Patients, investigators and site staff, monitors, and the sponsor's clinical team were all blinded to GB and placebo treatment.

BODY.METHODS.TRIAL DESIGN.VISIT SCHEDULE: After completing the screening visit, eligible patients entered a 7-day run-in, when LAMAs and LABAs were discontinued; LAMAs were replaced with ipratropium four times a day (withheld from 24 h before each study visit until the end of the treatment period) and LABAs were replaced with salbutamol as needed (prn). All patients were permitted salbutamol prn during the treatment periods, with a 6 h washout prior to any pulmonary function test. ICS use was permitted throughout the study, provided the dose had been stable for ≥4 weeks prior to entry (patients taking ICS/LABA fixed combination were prescribed ICS at an equivalent dose plus salbutamol prn).  In study Part 1, lung function was assessed pre-dose, and 15, 30 and 45 min and 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 12.5 and 24 h post-dose. In study Part 2, lung function was assessed pre-dose on Day 1, and pre-dose and 15, 30 and 45 min and 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 and 12 h post-dose on days 7 and 8. Blood samples were collected for pharmacokinetic (PK) analysis on days 1 and 7 of study Part 2 at pre-dose and at 5, 10, 15 and 30 min and 1, 2, 4, 6, 8 and 12 h post-dose, and pre-dose on Day 6. Urine samples were collected pre-dose on Day 1, and at 0–4 h and 4–12 h on days 1 and 7.

BODY.METHODS.OBJECTIVES AND OUTCOMES.STUDY PART 1: The primary objective was to assess the safety and tolerability of single-dose GB at five dose levels. Secondary objectives were to assess the bronchodilator effects of GB, compared with placebo, in terms of FEV1 area under the curve from 0 to 12 h (AUC0 –12h) normalized by time, and peak FEV1.

BODY.METHODS.OBJECTIVES AND OUTCOMES.STUDY PART 2: The primary objective was to assess the bronchodilator efficacy of GB compared to placebo, in terms of 12 h trough FEV1 on Day 7 (using data collected at 12 h after morning administration of medication on Day 7).  Secondary objectives included: evaluation of the bronchodilator effects of GB versus placebo on Day 7, in terms of FEV1 AUC0–12h normalized by time, and peak FEV1, and comparison of GB with placebo and tiotropium, with respect to pre-dose morning FEV1 on Day 8. Safety and tolerability was assessed by adverse events (AEs), ECGs (12-lead and 24 h Holter), vital signs and laboratory tests. The PK profile of GB was analyzed after single (on Day 1) and repeated administration (ie, at steady state, assessed on Day 7).  An exploratory objective was to evaluate the additive effect of single-dose formoterol over GB; the difference between 8 and 7 days (ie, with and without formoterol) in peak FEV1, FEV1 AUC0–12h normalized by time and 12 h trough FEV1 was determined.

BODY.METHODS.SAMPLE SIZE: There was no formal power calculation for study Part 1, as this was primarily performed for safety evaluation. A sample size of 24 patients (12 patients per cohort: 10 on GB and 2 on placebo in each treatment period) was considered sufficient for dose escalation. Dropouts were replaced to have at least 11 evaluable patients per cohort.  For the primary endpoint of study Part 2 (12 h trough FEV1 on Day 7), 32 evaluable patients provided 80% power to detect a mean difference of 120 mL between at least one dose of GB and placebo at a two-sided significance level of 0.05, adjusting for multiplicity using Hommel's method and assuming a within-subject standard deviation (SD) of 140 mL. Assuming a nonevaluable rate of 20%, a total of 40 patients would need to be randomized. Patients prematurely withdrawing were not replaced.

BODY.METHODS.STATISTICAL METHODS: In study Part 1, FEV1 AUC0–12h (normalized by time) and peak FEV1 were analyzed descriptively, and the mean change from baseline and 95% confidence intervals are presented. In study Part 2, trough FEV1 at 12 h post-dose on Day 7 was analyzed using an analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) model (core periods only), with treatment, period and patient as fixed effects and baseline FEV1 (pre-dose on Day 1) as the covariate. The P-values of the comparisons between each dose of GB and placebo were adjusted for multiplicity using Hommel's method. FEV1 AUC0–12h (normalized by time) and peak FEV1 on Day 7 were analyzed using the same ANCOVA model as for the primary variable, but without adjustment for multiplicity. Pre-dose morning FEV1 on Day 8 was submitted to an ANCOVA model with treatment and patient as fixed effects and baseline FEV1 as the covariate. For the exploratory objective, data on Day 8 (ie, after administration of formoterol) were compared with the respective values on Day 7 using paired t-tests. PK parameters were calculated using standard noncompartmental methods.  AEs, serious AEs (SAEs) and AEs leading to study withdrawal were presented descriptively; absolute values and mean changes from baseline were calculated for other safety parameters, with abnormal findings summarized by treatment. In both parts of the study, all randomized patients were included in the efficacy, safety and PK analyses.

BODY.RESULTS.PARTICIPANTS: In study Part 1, 66 patients were screened, and 27 were recruited (23 were initially randomized; 4 prematurely withdrew and were replaced), as shown in Figure 1A. In study Part 2, 145 patients were screened and 38 were randomized, with 34 completing it (Figure 1B). Baseline demographics and disease characteristics of the randomized patients are shown in Table 1.

BODY.RESULTS.EFFICACY.STUDY PART 1: All GB doses were associated with statistically significant increases from baseline in FEV1 AUC0–12h (Figure 2) and peak FEV1 (Figure 3). The largest differences compared to placebo were observed with the three highest GB doses (50, 100 and 200 μg); both the FEV1 AUC0–12h and peak FEV1 data suggest the plateau of the dose response curve had been reached at these doses.

BODY.RESULTS.EFFICACY.STUDY PART 2.PRIMARY ENDPOINT: All three GB doses resulted in statistically significant increases versus placebo in terms of 12 h trough FEV1 on Day 7, with no significant differences between GB doses (Figure 4). The adjusted mean (95% confidence interval) differences compared to placebo were 115 (76, 155), 142 (102, 182) and 136 (96, 176) mL for the 12.5, 25 and 50 μg BID doses, respectively.

BODY.RESULTS.EFFICACY.STUDY PART 2.SECONDARY ENDPOINTS: All three GB doses were associated with statistically significant improvements versus placebo in terms of FEV1 AUC0–12h normalized by time on Day 7, with no significant difference between GB doses (Figure 5). Mean changes from baseline in peak FEV1 values on Day 7 were 292, 320 and 332 mL for GB 12.5, 25 and 50 μg BID, respectively, compared with 83 mL for placebo (P<0.001 for all GB doses versus placebo). The difference between GB 12.5 and 25 μg BID was significant (P=0.034).

BODY.RESULTS.COMPARISONS WITH TIOTROPIUM: For pre-dose morning FEV1 on Day 8, all three GB doses were associated with statistically significant increases versus placebo, with the two highest GB doses being statistically superior to both tiotropium and GB 12.5 μg BID (Figure 6). The adjusted mean differences versus tiotropium were 71 and 47 mL with GB 25 and 50 μg BID, respectively.

BODY.RESULTS.ADD-ON FORMOTEROL: Compared with the Day 7 data, the addition of formoterol resulted in statistically significant increases in Day 8 peak (Figure 7), FEV1 AUC0–12h (Figure 8) and 12 h trough FEV1 (Figure S1) with all treatments. The magnitude of increase caused by formoterol added to placebo was approximately double that of formoterol added to GB; for example, for FEV1 AUC0–12h, the increases were ~200 and 100 mL, respectively.

BODY.RESULTS.SAFETY AND TOLERABILITY.STUDY PART 1: All of the AEs during study Part 1 were mild or moderate in severity, with a lower incidence with GB than placebo and no evidence of a dose-related trend (Table 2). Mean changes over time in the ECG parameters were similar following all treatments (including placebo). No patient had a Fridericia's corrected QTc (QTcF) interval value above 480 ms or a change from baseline of more than 60 ms. Two patients withdrew due to AEs – atrial fibrillation in a patient receiving placebo and ventricular extrasystoles in a patient receiving GB 50 μg. Two more patients withdrew due to ECG findings – one with a first-degree atrioventricular block following 12.5 μg GB and with a QTc value above normal at screening (the patient had completed the first treatment period by the time the decision was taken to withdraw the patient, and therefore was included in the analyses).

BODY.RESULTS.SAFETY AND TOLERABILITY.STUDY PART 2: There was no dose-related trend in AE incidence. All AEs were mild or moderate in severity, with no deaths or SAEs (Table 3). Few changes in laboratory parameters were observed, with no relevant differences in treatment-emergent laboratory abnormalities between any GB dose, tiotropium or placebo. Mean changes over time in all ECG parameters were similar over time for all treatments. No patient had a QTcF interval value above 480 ms; one patient had a change from baseline in QTcF interval >60 ms (during treatment with GB 50 μg BID).

BODY.RESULTS.PK (STUDY PART 2): Pre-dose mean plasma GB concentrations were similar on days 6 and 7, indicating that plasma steady state was reached within 6 days. GB plasma and urine PK parameters on days 1 and 7 are shown in Table 4. At a steady state, the mean maximum plasma concentration (Cmax,ss) increased proportionally with dose, as did systemic exposure over the first 30 min post-dose (AUC0–30 min,ss). Systemic exposure assessed by both AUC0–12h,ss and AUC0–t,ss increased more than proportionally across the full dose range, but approximately proportionally between 25 and 50 μg BID. In contrast, although the plasma elimination half-life (t1⁄2,ss) increased from 12.5 to 25 μg BID, the values were similar with the two higher doses. The median accumulation ratio (Rac) was also similar across doses (note that due to high variability of Rac values with the 25 and 50 μg doses, the median is more reliable than the mean). Mean urinary GB excretion increased proportionally with dose; in contrast, renal clearance decreased slightly with increasing dose.

BODY.DISCUSSION: The dose ranging study reported here provides information on bronchodilation, safety and PK of single and multiple doses of a novel extrafine GB formulation delivered by pMDI. This formulation was well tolerated in both parts of the study. Study Part 2 was a multiple-dose, BID-dosing, crossover study that provided important efficacy data; on Day 7, 25 μg BID was the lowest to meet the predefined threshold for clinical relevance for the primary endpoint (12 h trough FEV1) with a difference of ≥120 mL from placebo.  The dose response for GB in study Part 2 was also evaluated by considering the FEV1 AUC0–12h and peak FEV1 on Day 7. Consistent with the primary endpoint showing improvement of ≥120 mL compared to placebo for GB 25 and 50 μg BID, but not 12.5 μg BID, peak FEV1 showed a significantly greater improvement with GB 25 μg compared to 12.5 μg BID. The FEV1 AUC0–12h on Day 7 showed no significant difference between the GB doses, although numerically, the effect of GB 12.5 μg BID was the lowest. Overall, these data indicate that GB 25 and 50 μg BID caused greater lung function improvement than GB 12.5 μg BID, a finding supported by the Day 8 trough FEV1 analysis of GB compared to tiotropium. This suggests that GB 25 μg BID in this formulation may provide at least similar efficacy to tiotropium. This is consistent with data for the dry powder formulation of glycopyrronium, in which 50 μg OD was comparable to tiotropium in terms of lung function, dyspnea and health status.11 Overall, therefore, these results suggest that GB 25 μg BID is the optimal dose in patients with COPD.  The bronchodilator effects of inhaled glycopyrronium have been studied using both once and twice a day administration, with one study showing little difference between these regimens when the same daily dose was administered entirely in the morning or divided between morning and evening.12 The results reported here for twice a day administration are consistent with those for a porous particle pMDI formulation (in development for twice daily dosing), in which a single 28.8 μg dose resulted in differences from placebo of 158 mL in peak FEV1 and ~140 mL in FEV1 AUC0–12h.13  Given that we sought to evaluate the dose–response of GB, we enriched the population with individuals with a greater response to muscarinic blockade, identified by an increase in FEV1 ≥100 mL following inhalation of ipratropium at screening. Similar inclusion criteria have often been used in other early-phase clinical trials of novel LAMA formulations.14,15 This potentially limits the generalizability of the findings to a wider population, but this aspect can be addressed in later-phase clinical trials of longer duration with larger samples sizes. Furthermore, we used a tiotropium arm in order to help select GB doses that would be more likely to achieve at least comparable lung function improvements to those achieved with a commonly used LAMA.  The addition of a single dose of formoterol was associated with significant increases in peak FEV1, FEV1 AUC0–12h and 12 h trough FEV1 for all treatments. Although this study only investigated bronchodilation, other studies have demonstrated the broad clinical benefits of combining long-acting bronchodilators, either in separate devices16,17 or as a fixed combination in the same inhaler,18–28 in terms of dyspnea,18,21,24 exercise endurance time22 and health status.19,23,28,29  Triple therapy with LABA, LAMA and ICS has shown additional advantages to patients in terms of bronchodilation, dyspnea and exacerbations,8–10,29–32 and is one of the most commonly prescribed maintenance treatments for COPD.33 A combination of BDP and FF is currently available in the same device as used for GB in this study (Foster®; Chiesi Farmaceutici S.p.A., Parma, Italy) and has a BID dosing regimen. A logical development is, therefore, the co-formulation of BDP/FF and GB in the same inhaler.9,10 Furthermore, the extrafine formulation has potential advantages over conventional large particle standard formulations in that it allows higher total lung deposition as well as for deeper and more uniform distribution within the airways.34  An unusual characteristic of the population recruited into both parts of this study is the high proportion of female patients. Most interventional clinical trials in COPD have recruited predominantly male populations – and as a consequence, much of the data available on the efficacy of bronchodilators is generated from men. Although a number of epidemiology studies have identified gender influences on the risk or progression of COPD,35–37 post hoc analyses of clinical trials suggest that gender does not seem to influence the response to bronchodilators.38,39  In the PK analyses, plasma concentration, systemic exposure and urinary excretion all increased with increasing dose – in most cases, the increase being proportional to GB dose. This is also consistent with the PK analysis of the dry powder glycopyrronium formulation, dosed OD.40 The main purpose of study Part 1 was to provide safety data in order to allow continuation to study Part 2 for efficacy analysis. Study Part 1 showed that a single dose (200 μg), greater than doses used in study Part 2, had a good overall safety and tolerability profile. Few AEs were considered related to treatment, and no SAEs were reported during GB treatment in either part of the study. There was no evidence of a dose–response in terms of the AE occurrence in either part of the study – although it should be noted that the study was not designed to evaluate such a dose–response (this would probably require much higher doses to be administered for a longer period). In addition, the exclusion criteria, typical of Phase II studies, meant that patients with clinically significant comorbidities were excluded from participation, and so, confirmation of the observed good overall safety and tolerability profile would need further studies in wider populations. However, in longer-term studies, inhaled GB (in a different formulation) has demonstrated an overall good safety profile.11,41,42  Although this study was relatively small and a short-term one, two studies have been conducted that provide long-term evidence on the efficacy and safety of GB 25 μg BID as part of a fixed triple combination of BDP/FF/GB.9,10 The study reported here was focused on lung function in order to identify the optimum dose for later-phase studies with larger sample sizes and longer duration that could also evaluate symptoms and exacerbations.9,10,43  In conclusion, this study provides initial evidence of the bronchodilator efficacy and safety and tolerability profile of this extrafine formulation of GB.

BODY.SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS.INCLUSION CRITERIA: Subjects had to meet all of the following inclusion criteria (applicable for study Parts 1 and 2):
Male and female subjects, aged 40–75 years.

BODY.SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS.EXCLUSION CRITERIA: Subjects meeting at least one of the following criteria could not be enrolled (applicable for study Parts 1 and 2):
History of chronic or seasonal allergy.