TITLE: Abstract: 595nm Pulsed Dye Laser for Hypetrophic and Keloid Scars Treatment. a Randomized-Controlled Study

ABSTRACT 
  ABSTRACT: 

BODY: INTRODUCTION: The aim of our study was to assess the effects of the 595nm pulsed dye laser (PDL) in hypertrophic – keloid scars (aged >6 months) regardless of etiology (surgical, burns, etc).  METHODS: 50 patients were recruited. The scar (at least 4.5 cm long) was divided into 3 equal segments (at least 1.5 cm long). Each segment was randomized to either treatment modality A (purpuric: 1.5ms), B (non-purpuric: 10ms), or no treatment (control). Treatment sessions were performed at day 1, 30 and 60. Fluences were delivered according to Fitzpatrick skin type. Follow up visits were at 3 and 6 months. Standardized pictures were taken at each visit and patients were blindly assessed by a physician using the Vancouver Scar Scale (VSS). At baseline and each visit a series of parameters (hemoglobin and melanin concentration, skin texture) were recorded by means of multispectral analysis (Antera 3DTM). Patients were excluded if their scars were on the genitals, hands, or feet; they were < 18 year old; they had a history of light sensitivity. Written informed consent was obtained.  RESULTS: There was a statistically significant improvement in the mean values of the VSS in the non-purpuric group; the purpuric group showed a trend towards improvement (although not significant); the control group did not show any improvement. Hemoglobin concentration decreased significantly in the treated groups, as opposed to the control group. Skin texture varied significantly in the non-purpuric group.  CONCLUSION: Hypertrophic and keloid scars often result in patient dissatisfaction, functional impairment and decreased quality of life.1 The abundance of treatments in the literature indicates that no available treatment produces a reliable improvement1. The PDL appears to benefit recent scars of various etiologies: improvements in erythema, pliability, thickness, and pruritus were reported in a number of studies, with only minor adverse reactions.1–3 A recent controlled study demonstrated non-purpuric long pulse parameters to yield better results than purpuric impulses in recent scars.4 To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study investigating the use of non-purpuric long pulse durations (>6 ms) and non-purpuric short pulse durations (0.450–1.5 ms) in aged hypertrophic and keloid scars. We demonstrated that PDL is effective in improving hypertrophic and keloid scars, and that non-purpuric pulses are superior to purpuric ones in this indication.

BODY.REFERENCE CITATIONS:: 1. Tziotizios C, Profyris C, Sterling J: Cutaneous scarring: pathophysiology, molecular mechanisms, and scar reduction therapeutics. Part II. Strategies to reduce scar formation after dermatologic procedures. J Amer Acad Derm. 2012; 66: 13–24.  2.Vazquez-Martinez O, Eichelmann K, Garcia-Melendez M,et al. Pulsed Dye Laser for Early Treatment of Scars After Dermatological Surgery. J Drugs Dermatol. 2015;14: 1209–1212.  3. Cohen JL, Geronemus R. Safety and Efficacy Evaluation of Pulsed Dye Laser Treatment, CO2 Ablative Fractional Resurfacing, and Combined Treatment for Surgical Scar Clearance. J Drugs Dermatol. 2016; 15: 1315–1319.  4. Gladsjo J, Jiang SIB. Treatment of surgical scars with the 595 nm pulsed dye laser using purpuric and nonpurpuric parameters: a comparative study. Dermatol Surg. 2014; 40: 118–126.