TITLE: Maintenance tegafur-uracil versus observation following an adjuvant oxaliplatin-based regimen in patients with stage III colon cancer after radical resection: study protocol for a randomized controlled trial

  ABSTRACT.BACKGROUND:
We conducted a prospective randomized study of an adjuvant oxaliplatin-based regimen plus orally administered tegafur-uracil in patients with stage III colon cancer after radical resection to evaluate the feasibility of this drug combination in cancer clinical outcomes, acute toxicity, disease-free survival (DFS), and overall survival (OS) in Taiwan.

ABSTRACT.METHODS/DESIGN:
This is an open-label, randomized, comparative, double-arm, multicenter, phase III study to assess DFS, OS, and safety profiles of the aforementioned drug combination as maintenance therapy for 1 year in patients with stage III colon cancer after radical resection in Taiwan. Following the completion of an adjuvant oxaliplatin-based regimen for 3 weeks with no evident disease recurrence, all eligible patients will be randomly assigned to either arm A (maintenance therapy) or arm B (observation arm) in a 2:1 ratio (364 and 182 patients in the tegafur-uracil and observation groups, respectively). Treatment in arm A will be started within 7 days of randomization. If the patients reported disease recurrence, intolerable toxicity, withdrew consent or the investigator determined that the patient should be withdrawn during the study period, they were withdrawn from the study. If a patient was discontinued from the study, the corresponding data were not reused, and the patient was not allowed to re-enter the study.

ABSTRACT.DISCUSSION:
A unique characteristic of this intervention was that the adjuvant chemotherapy with oxaliplatin and tegafur-uracil was anticipated to be safe and has high treatment efficacy, with the advantage of yielding a favorable response rate and tolerable toxicity profile.

ABSTRACT.TRIAL REGISTRATION:
 xmlns:ns0="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">ClinicalTrials.gov, identifier: NCT02836977. Registered on 18 July 2016.

ABSTRACT.ELECTRONIC SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL:
The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s13063-017-1904-9) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

BODY.BACKGROUND.EPIDEMIOLOGY:
Colorectal cancer (CRC), the most frequently diagnosed cancer, is the third leading cause of cancer-related deaths in Taiwan. During the past decade, the incidence rate of CRC has increased from 38 to 70 per 100,000 men and 30 to 51 per 100,000 women. The annual incidence of CRC in Taiwan has increased up to 43.5% in the past decade, with more than 15,000 new cases and >5000 deaths annually; among these patients, approximately one fourth had stage III disease according to the Taiwan Cancer Registry Database [1, 2]. Approximately 42% of stage III colon cancer cases have recurrences within 8 years after radical resection. In the 8-year follow-up period, 82% of patients with stage III colon cancer experienced recurrences in the initial 3 years [3].

BODY.BACKGROUND.CURRENT TREATMENT MODALITY:
Intravenously administered (IV) 5-fluorouracil (FU) has been the most widely used chemotherapeutic agent for CRC for more than 40 years [4] and is included in various combination treatments such as those with oxaliplatin and irinotecan with or without biological agents (i.e., cetuximab and bevacizumab) [5]. Since 2004, FOLFOX4 (85 mg/m2 oxaliplatin combined with 200 mg/m2 leucovorin (LV) over 2 h, followed by a 400-mg/m2 5-FU bolus and 22-h continuous infusion of 600 mg/m2 5-FU) has been the accepted first-line therapy in advanced CRC [6]. The FOLFOX6 regimen comprises 100 mg/m2 oxaliplatin and 400 mg/m2 LV as a 2-h infusion on day l, followed by a 400-mg/m2 5-FU IV bolus and a 46-h continuous infusion of 2400–3000 mg/m2 5-FU; this regimen was repeated at 2-week intervals.

BODY.BACKGROUND.INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCT (IP) DESCRIPTION:
Tegafur-uracil, containing tegafur and uracil in a molar ratio of 1:4, is an antimalignant tumor agent with an antimetabolic effect. Tegafur is metabolized in vivo to 5-FU, which is a pyrimidine analog antimetabolite that is metabolized to 5-fluoro-2'-deoxyuridine monophosphate (FdUMP) and 5-fluorouridine triphosphate (FUTP). FdUMP inhibits deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) synthesis by binding to thymidylate synthase and inhibiting thymidylate production. FUTP interferes with ribonucleic acid (RNA) processing when it is mistakenly incorporated instead of uridine triphosphate. Uracil facilitates maintaining intracellular levels of 5-FU by inhibiting its degradation.  Clinical trials have confirmed that the optimal combination ratio of tegafur-uracil yields long-lasting characteristics and high 5-FU concentrations in tumors. They have revealed the efficacy of tegafur-uracil as an antitumor agent for treating head and neck, gastric and breast cancers and CRC.

BODY.BACKGROUND.PRECLINICAL DATA:
Tegafur-uracil can inhibit the growth of tumors such as Walker 256 carcinosarcoma, Yoshida sarcoma, ascites carcinoma (in rats), sarcoma 180, Ehrlich carcinoma, Lewis lung carcinoma, and B-16 melanoma (in mice) transplanted subcutaneously. It can also inhibit the growth of human cancers, such as gastric, beast, and pancreatic cancers, when transplanted subcutaneously in nude mice. In addition, its survival effects have been proven in animals (mice) bearing L1210 transplanted leukemia.  The antitumor activity of tegafur-uracil is based on 5-FU that appears gradually in the body through the transformation of tegafur. The mechanism of 5-FU is considered to be the inhibition of DNA synthesis, resulting from the antagonistic effect of the active metabolite FdUMP on dUMP to inhibit thymidylate synthase, and RNA-function disorders, resulting from the incorporation of FUTP into RNA. Uracil enhances the antitumor activity of tegafur.

BODY.BACKGROUND.CLINICAL DATA AND EXPERIENCE:
The efficacy of adjuvant treatment in CRC was clearly demonstrated as recently as the early 1990s, and 5-FU + LV became the standard treatment for stage III colon cancer in 1996 [7, 8]. The MOSAIC trial [9] demonstrated the superiority of FOLFOX4 over 5-FU + LV, and in 2004, the FOLFOX4 regimen became the standard adjuvant treatment for stage III colon cancer.  Several clinical trials have demonstrated the efficacy of tegafur-uracil in postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy. The basic data from these studies indicate a possible contribution of the antiangiogenic activity of tegafur-uracil to its overall antitumor activity, which until now has been considered to be mediated by the cytotoxic effects of 5-FU. Thus, tegafur-uracil seems to be particularly useful in a chronic postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy regimen to prevent cancer progression.  Each cycle of tegafur-uracil + LV reduced the mean clinical visits by 66%, house staff visits by 17%, health professional visits by 36%, transfusion procedures by 74%, and diagnostic procedures by 33% compared with 5-FU + LV. In addition, tegafur-uracil + LV reduced monthly clinical visits of each patient by 4.5 h compared with 5-FU + LV. Tegafur-uracil + LV was associated with lower resource use than was an 5-FU + LV IV bolus, mainly because of fewer hospitalizations for the treatment of adverse events (AEs; tegafur-uracil + LV (21%) versus 5-FU (36%)) [10].

BODY.BACKGROUND.TRIAL RATIONALE:
Additional maintenance therapy (12 cycles of tegafur-uracil (400 mg daily) + LV ((60 mg daily) for 28 days at a 7-day interval), followed by six cycles of 5-FU (375 mg/m2) + LV (30 mg daily) by a rapid IV injection for 5 days every 4 weeks (the Mayo Clinic regimen) significantly enhanced disease-free survival (DFS) compared with 5-FU + LV in patients with stage III colon cancer [11]. In patients with advanced CRC, a sequential therapy with a highly active chemotherapeutic regimen (e.g., FOLFOX4) for 6 months, followed by maintenance therapy with orally administered fluoropyrimidine (e.g., tegafur-uracil) is advantageous for obtaining a favorable toxicity profile and ease of administration by the oral route which is preferable for patients because of the more convenient outpatient therapy. The maintenance therapy with oral tegafur-uracil for patients responding to FOLFOX4 can maintain the treatment response and improve quality of life because it allows an outpatient regimen and the oral therapy entails lower psychological distress [5].  Adjuvant chemotherapy may prolong the 3-year DFS in patients with stage III colon cancer. However, cold-triggered, acute sensory reversible neuropathy and treatment-limiting chronic sensory neurotoxicity are associated with the cumulative dose of oxaliplatin [12], which is an indication to stop oxaliplatin treatment in patients who are still responding to treatment. Therefore, we designed a trial to demonstrate the utility of maintenance therapy with tegafur-uracil in patients with stage III colon cancer after a 6-month oxaliplatin-based regimen. The primary objective of this trial was to verify the 3-year DFS after 1 year of tegafur-uracil treatment.

BODY.OBJECTIVE.PRIMARY OBJECTIVE:
To compare the 3-year DFS of tegafur-uracil following an adjuvant oxaliplatin-based regimen with that of an adjuvant oxaliplatin-based regimen in patients with stage III colon cancer after radical resection.

BODY.OBJECTIVE.SECONDARY OBJECTIVES:

To assess and compare the 5-year overall survival (OS) in maintenance therapy and observation arms

BODY.METHODS/DESIGN:
We will recruit participants from following centers:  Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital (IRB number: KMUHIRB-F(I)-20160016), Cathay General Hospital, Taipei Medical University Hospital, Far Eastern Memorial Hospital, Tri-Service General Hospital, Taichung Veterans General Hospital, China Medical University Hospital, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung Veterans General Hospital, National Cheng Kung University Hospital.

BODY.PATIENT SELECTION AND ENROLLMENT.PATIENT NUMBER:
Eligible patients will be randomized in two arms in a ratio of 2:1 to reach an approximate total of 546 patients. The sample size ratio is 2:1 (study arm is 2, control is 1), treatment duration is 1 year. Based on data of the 3-year DFS rate from our previous retrospective study, the proportion of control arm is 0.55 (55%) and of the study arm is 0.7 (70%) with a significance level of 0.05 and a power of 80%.

BODY.PATIENT SELECTION AND ENROLLMENT.INCLUSION CRITERIA:
For inclusion in the study, each patient must fulfill the following criteria:Pathology-confirmed colon carcinoma

BODY.PATIENT SELECTION AND ENROLLMENT.EXCLUSION CRITERIA:
Patients fulfilling any of the following criteria will be excluded from the trial:Previous or current systemic malignancy except curatively treated nonmelanoma skin cancer or in situ cervical carcinoma, unless there exists a DFS of at least 5 years

BODY.PATIENT SELECTION AND ENROLLMENT.TRIAL ENROLLMENT METHOD (FIG. :
Trial enrollment. Stage III disease: T1–4, N1–2, and M0, as defined by the AJCC 7th edition. Completion of an adjuvant oxaliplatin-based regimen with no evident disease recurrence. The patients were withdrawn in cases of disease recurrence, intolerable toxicity, or consent withdrawal during the study  Patient eligibility criteria will be established before treatment enrollment.  Following the completion of an adjuvant oxaliplatin-based regimen within 3 weeks with no evident disease recurrence, all eligible patients will be randomly assigned to either arm A (maintenance therapy) or arm B (observation arm) in a 2:1 ratio (364 and 182 patients in the tegafur-uracil and observation groups, respectively). Treatment in arm A will be started within 7 days of the randomization.  If the patients report disease recurrence, intolerable toxicity, or consent withdrawal or are removed according to the investigator's discretion during the study period, they will be withdrawn from the study. If a patient wishes to discontinue the study, the corresponding data will not be reused, and the patient will not be allowed to re-enter the study.

BODY.STUDY PLAN.STUDY DESIGN:
This is an open-label, randomized, comparative, double-arm, multicenter, phase III study to assess DFS, OS, and safety profiles with tegafur-uracil following an adjuvant oxaliplatin-based regimen as maintenance therapy for 1 year in patients with stage III colon cancer after radical resection in Taiwan (see Additional file 1 for the SPIRIT 2013 checklist).

BODY.STUDY PLAN.PATIENT NUMBER:
Eligible patients will be randomized in two arms in a 2:1 ratio to reach an approximate total of 546 patients.

BODY.STUDY PLAN.STUDY SCHEDULE:
Study date: the time of obtaining an approval letter from both regulatory authority and Institutional Review Board (IRB).Expected recruitment rate: 24 patients/month

BODY.STUDY PLAN.VISIT SCHEDULE:
The schedule of assessments (see 'Assessment schedule' below for details) indicates the number and timing of the planned visits, which must be followed as accurately as possible. Moreover, the visit schedule must be accurately followed.

BODY.STUDY PLAN.TREATMENT DURATION:
Treatment will be administered for up to a maximum of 1 year, and in case of disease progression, intolerable toxicity, or consent withdrawal during the study, the patients will be withdrawn.

BODY.TRIAL TREATMENT.DATA ON INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCT (TABLE :
Data on the investigational product

BODY.TRIAL TREATMENT.DATA ON INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCT (TABLE .PREPARATION AND ADMINISTRATION OF THE INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCT:
Tegafur-uracil capsules (200 mg) will be administered twice daily (400 mg daily) at regular intervals. They will be administered whole and either 1 h before or after food consumption in the morning and evening.

BODY.TRIAL TREATMENT.LABELING AND SUPPLY:
Tegafur-uracil is commercially available and supplied by the investigator's pharmacy. The batch numbers of the used drugs will be diligently obtained and recorded.

BODY.TRIAL TREATMENT.STORAGE:
The drugs will be stored at below 30 °C. Procedures for the appropriate handling and disposal of anticancer medications will be followed.

BODY.TRIAL TREATMENT.DOSAGE AND TREATMENT REGIMENS:
Eligible patients will receive orally administered tegafur-uracil (400 mg daily; 100 mg/capsule, two capsules each time, twice daily) and folinic acid (30 mg daily; 15 mg/tablet, one tablet each time, twice daily) for 1 year.

BODY.TRIAL TREATMENT.DOSE MODIFICATION:

The dose after the first treatment will be modified on the basis of the highest toxicity degree graded according to National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (NCI-CTCAE) v4.03  If the patients experience any of the following consequence during the study, they will be withdrawn from the study treatment:Disease recurrence  All information regarding the withdrawal will be recorded in the Case Report Form (CRF)

BODY.TRIAL TREATMENT.PRESTUDY, CONCOMITANT, AND POST-STUDY TREATMENTS:

Concomitant treatment

BODY.STUDY MEASUREMENT AND ENDPOINTS.SCREENING AND DEMOGRAPHIC MEASUREMENTS:
The assessment schedule is illustrated in the 'Assessment schedule' section below. Each patient must sign and date an informed consent form before undergoing any study specific procedure, unless the procedure is considered the standard of care.  Screening procedures will be performed before the first treatment according to the assessment schedule within the required timeline.Demographic and past medical history

BODY.STUDY MEASUREMENT AND ENDPOINTS.EFFICACY MEASUREMENTS AND ENDPOINTS:
In this study, we set 3-year DFS and 5-year OS as the primary endpoints and the differences the difference in survival distributions between two groups were analyzed using the log-rank test.Three-year disease-free survival (DFS)

BODY.STUDY MEASUREMENT AND ENDPOINTS.SAFETY MEASUREMENTS AND ENDPOINTS:

Hematology and biochemistry

BODY.ASSESSMENT SCHEDULE (TABLE .DATA MANAGEMENT AND STATISTICAL METHODS.DATA MANAGEMENT:
CRFs will be provided for recording the data. Data will be recorded directly and legibly onto the CRFs by using a black-ink pen. If any data are unavailable, reason for omissions will be mentioned on the CRFs. Corrections will be made legibly and initiated and dated by an approved personnel; the reasons for marked changes will be provided. Correction fluid or covering labels will not be used.

BODY.ASSESSMENT SCHEDULE (TABLE .DATA MANAGEMENT AND STATISTICAL METHODS.STATISTICAL METHODS AND SAMPLE SIZE DETERMINATION:
This is an open-label, randomized, comparative, double-arm, multicenter, phase III study of tegafur-uracil following an adjuvant oxaliplatin-based regimen in patients with stage III colon cancer after radical resection.Statistical evaluation

BODY.ASSESSMENT SCHEDULE (TABLE .ADVERSE EVENTS:
Timely, accurate, and complete reporting and analysis of safety information from clinical studies are crucial for the treatment of patients and for investigators and are mandated by regulatory agencies worldwide.

BODY.ASSESSMENT SCHEDULE (TABLE .DEFINITIONS:

Adverse events

BODY.ASSESSMENT SCHEDULE (TABLE .REPORTING:

Adverse event reporting

BODY.ASSESSMENT SCHEDULE (TABLE .FOLLOW-UP:

For safe follow-up, each patient will be followed for the occurrence of SAEs until 30 days after the last dose of the study medication or introduction of an additional antitumor therapy, whichever occurs first

BODY.ASSESSMENT SCHEDULE (TABLE .PREGNANCY REPORT:
Patient pregnancy will be reported by the investigational staff within 24 h of their knowledge. The study medication may affect pregnancies in partners of male patients included in the study; therefore, it will be reported by the investigational staff within 24 h of their knowledge. Any patient who becomes pregnant during the study will be promptly withdrawn from the study. Follow-up information regarding outcomes of the pregnancy and any postnatal sequelae in the infant will be reported.

BODY.ASSESSMENT SCHEDULE (TABLE .GOOD CLINICAL PRACTICE:
The trial will be conducted in accordance with the World Medical Association's Declaration of Helsinki, as amended in 1996, and Good Clinical Practice (GCP) principles, as defined in the ICH of Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use Harmonized Tripartite Guidelines for GCP.

BODY.ASSESSMENT SCHEDULE (TABLE .INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD APPROVAL:
The investigator will submit a copy of the protocol to the local IRB for consideration. The study will not start in each center until the IRB provides written approval of the protocol.

BODY.ASSESSMENT SCHEDULE (TABLE .CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION:
The investigator will be responsible for providing written (Patient Information Sheets) and verbal information to the patient and obtaining written informed consent before conducting study-specific procedures for the patients enrolled in the trial. Informed consent will be presented in language comprehensible to the patients or their legally authorized representatives. The patients or their representatives will be provided with adequate time to read the completed informed consent and their questions will be addressed. Informed consent will be obtained in a noncoercive manner, and the patients will be informed that participation is voluntary and will not affect the care that they may otherwise receive. After obtaining the consent, the patients or their representatives will be asked to sign and date the Consent Form, and the investigator or other authorized individuals obtaining the consent will also sign and date the form. A copy of the completed Consent Form will be provided to the patients. The investigator will confirm in writing that informed consent has been obtained and that a copy of the Consent Form is provided to the patients.

BODY.ASSESSMENT SCHEDULE (TABLE .PREMATURE TRIAL TERMINATION:
The regulatory authority, IRB, and the investigator have the right to terminate the trial at any time for reasonable medical and administrative reasons. Reasons for termination will be appropriately documented.

BODY.DISCUSSION:
CRC remains a leading form of cancer worldwide. In Taiwan, CRC is the most common cancer and the third leading cause of cancer-related deaths. The annual incidence of CRC in Taiwan has increased up to 43.5% in the past decade, with >15,000 new cases and >5000 deaths annually [1]. Randomized clinical trials have reported that the survival rate and quality of life in patients with stage III colon cancer who received chemotherapy were superior to those who were offered the most favorable supportive care alone. These observations support the use of different combination chemotherapy regimens. Moreover, novel therapeutic strategies are required to achieve more favorable clinical efficacy, with an acceptable toxicity profile.  Oxaliplatin, a platinum derivative, shows synergism; it is a third-generation diaminocyclohexane platinum compound that inhibits replication and transcription through the formation of DNA adducts [13]. To achieve more desirable efficacy and safety in stage III colon cancer, adjuvant chemotherapy with 5-FU has become the standard treatment. To provide the most favorable care for all patients with stage III colon cancer, aggressive treatment guidelines are crucial. Oxaliplatin, 5-FU, and LV combination chemotherapy is accepted and was reported as an effective first-line treatment regimen for advanced or metastatic gastric cancer or CRC [14, 15].  After radical surgery and adjuvant chemotherapy, more intensive treatment must be considered for stage III colon cancer to achieve more desirable disease control and improved OS. However, maintenance tegafur-uracil versus observation following an adjuvant oxaliplatin-based regimen in patients with stage III colon cancer after radical resection has not been highly altered in the last few decades. The efficacy and safety of chemotherapeutic agents are fundamental aspects of treating patients with stage III colon cancer. In this study, we set 3-year DFS and 5-year OS as the primary endpoints for evaluation to determine the effects of maintenance tegafur-uracil following an adjuvant oxaliplatin-based regimen in patients with stage III colon cancer.  In summary, adjuvant chemotherapy with oxaliplatin and tegafur-uracil is safe and has remarkable treatment efficacy, with the advantage of yielding a favorable response rate and a tolerable toxicity profile. We recognize that although observational studies provide some valuable information, they are not adequately capable of providing credible evidence. This observation, in addition to the limitations derived from the retrospective data collected from medical charts and lack of a control group, entails the urgent need to perform prospectively randomized studies to confirm the results.  Additional trials are required to confirm the benefits of tegafur-uracil administration following an adjuvant oxaliplatin-based regimen in patients with stage III colon cancer.

BODY.DISCUSSION.TRIAL STATUS:
The trial started in July 2016 and is expected to enroll 546 patients in the study and control groups by the end of July 2018.