TITLE: Angiotensin-(1-7) relieved renal injury induced by chronic intermittent
hypoxia in rats by reducing inflammation, oxidative stress and
fibrosis

  ABSTRACT:
We aimed to study the renal injury and hypertension induced by chronic intermittent
hypoxia (CIH) and the protective effects mediated by angiotensin 1-7 [Ang(1-7)]. We
randomly assigned 32 male Sprague-Dawley rats (body weight 180-200 g) to normoxia
control, CIH, Ang(1-7)-treated normoxia, and Ang(1-7)-treated CIH groups. Systolic
blood pressure (SBP) was monitored at the start and end of each week. Renal
sympathetic nerve activity (RSNA) was recorded. CTGF and TGF-β were detected by
immunohistochemistry and western blotting. Tissue parameters of oxidative stress were
also determined. In addition, renal levels of interleukin-6, tumor necrosis factor-α,
nitrotyrosine, and hypoxia-inducible factor-1α were determined by
immunohistochemistry, immunoblotting, and ELISA. TUNEL assay results and cleaved
caspase 3 and 12 were also determined. Ang(1-7) induced a reduction in SBP together
with a restoration of RSNA in the rat model of CIH. Ang(1-7) treatment also
suppressed the production of reactive oxygen species, reduced renal tissue
inflammation, ameliorated mesangial expansion, and decreased renal fibrosis. Thus,
Ang(1-7) treatment exerted renoprotective effects on CIH-induced renal injury and was
associated with a reduction of oxidative stress, inflammation and fibrosis. Ang(1-7)
might therefore represent a promising therapy for obstructive sleep apnea-related
hypertension and renal injury.

BODY.INTRODUCTION:
Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is a chronic disease that influences several systems
in vivo. It is characterized by the obstruction of the upper airways
with repetitive pauses in breathing during sleep (despite efforts to breathe) as well as
by daytime sleepiness (1). OSA affects at least
2–4% of the adult population, largely impacting older adults, and its prevalence has
been reported to exceed 30% in those aged 65 years and above (2). In addition, approximately 50% of patients are hypertensive and
an estimated 30-40% of hypertensive individuals have OSA (3), with OSA representing by far the most common secondary condition
associated with resistant hypertension (4).
Notably, Fletcher (5) has emphasized the causal
link between chronic intermittent hypoxia (CIH) and increased arterial pressure. The
relationship between OSA and hypertension has been extensively investigated by other
research as well (4,6). Patients with severe OSA also exhibit a high prevalence of
chronic kidney disease (CKD) and it has further been found to accelerate the loss of
kidney function. Moreover, animals exposed to intermittent hypoxia suffer
histopathological renal damage (7). However, the
underlying mechanism of this association remains unclear despite the progress made by
many studies in understanding OSA and renal injury.  OSA might contribute to renal disease through its association with vascular dysfunction
and inflammation, oxidative stress, intra-renal hypoxia, dysregulation of the
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS), and increased sympathetic nervous system
activity (8
–10). It has
been found that activation of angiotensin II (Ang II) plays an important role in the
pathological and physiological process of CIH (11). RAAS activation is implicated in most forms of kidney injury and inhibiting
its main effector, Ang II, remains a cornerstone of therapy (12,13).
Angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 (ACE2) efficiently hydrolyzes Ang II into angiotensin
1-7 [Ang (1–7)], a bioactive peptide in the renin-angiotensin system that has regulatory
actions counter to those of AngII (14). It was
proposed that the activation of the ACE2-Ang(1–7)-Mas axis might prevent or reverse
organ damage in experimental models of renal diseases (15). Consistent with this, Ferrario et al. (16) demonstrated that increased Ang(1-7) could serve as a renoprotective
factor. However, the role of Ang(1-7) in the CIH-exposed kidney remains unknown. In the
present study, our aim was to explore the mechanism of OSA and renal injury and the
potential protective role of Ang(1-7) in CIH-induced hypertensive rats.  Specifically, the present study was designed to test the hypothesis that a 4-week
treatment with Ang(1-7) could exert renoprotective and antihypertensive effects in CIH
rats, an OSA animal model that displays a progressive development of sleep apnea (17). We focused on the effects of Ang(1-7) treatment
at various levels as indicated by oxidative stress markers, structural modifications
(renal fibrosis), inflammation markers, and renal apoptosis.

BODY.MATERIAL AND METHODS.EXPERIMENTAL PROTOCOLS:
Male Sprague-Dawley rats (n=32, body weight=180-200 g) were purchased from the
Experimental Animal Center of Wuhan University (Wuhan, China). Eight rats (exposed to
normoxia control, Norm group) were randomly selected to establish the baseline levels
of all the biomarkers. The remaining 24 rats were subcutaneously embedded with an
osmotic mini-pump (Alzet model 2004, Cupertino, USA), and randomly divided into three
groups, denoted as CIH (CIH exposure without any treatment), CIHAng (CIH
exposure+Ang(1-7) infusion at 400 ng·kg-1·min-1 for 28 days) or
NormAng (normoxia exposure+Ang(1-7) infusion at 400
ng·kg-1·min-1 for 28 days).  This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Wuhan University, China, and
conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and the Guide for the Care
and Use of Laboratory Animals, as adopted and promulgated by the United National
Institutes of Health. The rats were housed in departmental animal chambers and were
maintained under a 12-12 h light-dark cycle under standard laboratory conditions
(temperature, 25±2°C; humidity, 60±5%). The rats were provided standard rodent chow
and allowed free access to water. At the end of the experiment, all rats were
sacrificed as described below. Every effort was made to minimize the number of rats
used and their suffering during the experiments.  The model of CIH was established according to previously published methods (18). Briefly, sealed chambers were used to
generate a hypoxic environment. Pure nitrogen and compressed air were distributed
into each chamber through timed solenoid valves. Using 90-s cycles, pure nitrogen was
infused into each chamber for the first 30 s until the minimum oxygen concentration
reached 5%. Compressed air was infused for the remaining 60 s to allow the oxygen
concentration in the chambers to return gradually to 20.9%. For the Norm group, air
was forced into the chamber. For CIHAng and CIH groups, hypoxia exposure experiments
were performed between 8:00 am and 4:00 pm.

BODY.MATERIAL AND METHODS.MEASUREMENT OF SBP:
Systolic blood pressure (SBP) was measured every week using tail cuff plethysmography
(RBP-1 non-invasive BP analyzer, Chengdu Technology, China), in conscious animals.
The average of three measurements was used for data analysis.

BODY.MATERIAL AND METHODS.RSNA RECORDING:
Renal sympathetic nerve activity (RSNA) was recorded on rats under deep isoflurane
anesthesia using fine wire bipolar electrodes placed on the left renal nerve under
direct visualization using a surgical microscope. A left subcostal incision was made
and the kidney was approached from the retroperitoneal space under an anatomical
microscope. A bundle of renal nerves was identified and gently freed from the
surrounding tissue. One of the renal nerves was dissected and hooked to a pair of
silver electrodes. To insulate the electrodes and the nerve from the surrounding
tissue and to prevent desiccation of the nerves, we covered the electrodes and the
nerve preparation with liquid paraffin. Electrical changes in RSNA were amplified,
filtered, and monitored on an oscilloscope with a low-frequency cutoff of 100 Hz and
a high-frequency cutoff of 3000 Hz. RSNA was integrated at a time constant of 10 ms
with a sampling frequency at 10 kHz. Rats were allowed to stabilize for 30–60 min
after surgery before initiating the acute experimental protocols. The bipolar
platinum electrode was connected to a biological polygraph (RM6240BD, Chengdu
Technology, China) to record RSNA simultaneously. After stabilization of the signal,
the rats of the CIHAng and NormAng groups were given a daily dose of Ang(1-7) (576
μg/kg) via intravenous injection into the tail vein, and changes in RSNA were
observed. Integrated RSNA was simultaneously recorded. The postmortem background
signal was determined and the experimental data were corrected for this value. The
change in RSNA after the intervention is reported as the percent change from the
baseline.

BODY.MATERIAL AND METHODS.COLLECTION OF TISSUE SAMPLES AND HISTOLOGICAL STUDY:
Rats from each experimental group were sacrificed via blood collection through
intracardiac puncture. Blood samples were subjected to centrifugation at 377.3 g for
15 min at 4°C and the sera were stored at −80°C. Both kidneys of each animal were
perfused with saline solution through the abdominal aorta until they were free of
blood. For histological and immunohistochemical studies, decapsulated kidneys were
cut longitudinally, fixed in phosphate-buffered 10% formaldehyde, pH 7.2, and
embedded in paraffin. Then, 3-μm sections were cut, stained with Sirius red, and
illuminated with a polarized light. Histological observations under light microscopy
were performed using a Nikon E400 light microscope (Nikon Instrument Group, USA).
Measurements were carried out with Image-Pro Plus image analyzer version 4.5 for
Windows (Media Cybernetics, Silver Spring, MD). The remaining parts of the renal
tissues were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C.

BODY.MATERIAL AND METHODS.IMMUNOHISTOCHEMICAL ANALYSIS:
Kidney samples were fixed in 10% neutral formalin and embedded in paraffin, and then
3-mm thick sections were cut. The sections were incubated twice in xylene for 5 min
each, followed by dehydration in a gradient of histology-grade ethanol for 5 min
each, then rehydrated and rinsed in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Slides were then
incubated in 30% H2O2 for 10 min at room temperature and washed
twice with distilled water and PBS. Bovine serum albumin was added to the slides for
15 min. Next, the excess serum was removed and one of the following primary
antibodies was added (all antibodies were from Boster, China, unless otherwise
indicated): goat polyclonal anti-IL-6 (1:200 dilution), monoclonal antibody against
rat TNF-α (dilution 1:50), monoclonal antibody against anti-HIF-1α (dilution 1:100),
polyclonal antibody anti-CTGF (1:100 dilution), rabbit polyclonal antibody
anti-nitrotyrosine (dilution 1:100; Millipore, USA) or polyclonal antibody anti-TGF-α
(1:100 dilution), followed by incubation for 1 h at room temperature. After three
washes with PBS for 3 min each, secondary antibodies (goat anti-rabbit IgG-HRP,
1:50,000, Boster) were added and incubated for 15 min at room temperature, followed
by three 3-min washes with PBS. Integrated optical density (IOD) was measured using
Image Pro Plus (version 6.0; Media Cybernetics, USA).

BODY.MATERIAL AND METHODS.MEASUREMENT OF PLASMA LEVELS OF TNF-Α, IL-6, AND ANG II:
Blood samples were centrifuged at 1756 g for 10 min and stored at
-20°C until use. Plasma levels of TNF-α, IL-6, and Ang II were detected by
solid-phase sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kits (Elabscience
Biotechnology Co., Ltd., China) specific for these factors and absorbance was
measured at 450 nm using a plate reader (BioTek ELx800, USA).

BODY.MATERIAL AND METHODS.MEASUREMENT OF OXIDATIVE PARAMETERS IN THE RENAL TISSUE:
Frozen renal specimens from the rats were homogenized in tissue lysis buffer
(Beyotime, China). After lysis for 15 min on ice, the homogenates were centrifuged at
1756 g for 15 min at 4°C. The malondialdehyde (MDA) contents in the
supernatant were measured using commercially available kits (Jiancheng Bioengineering
Institute, China). Briefly, the MDA contents in the homogenates were determined
spectrophotometrically by measuring the presence of thiobarbituric acid-reactive
substances as follows: 3 mL 1% phosphoric acid and 1 mL 0.6% thiobarbituric acid
solution were added to 0.5 mL plasma that had been pipetted into a tube. The mixture
was then heated in boiling water for 45 min. After the mixture had cooled, the color
was extracted into 4 mL n-butanol. Absorbance was measured using a spectrophotometer
(UV-1601; Shimadzu, Japan) at 532 nm. The amount of lipid peroxide was calculated to
represent the thiobarbituric acid-reactive substances subject to lipid peroxidation.
The results are reported in nmol/mg protein, according to a standard graph prepared
from measurements of standard solutions (1,1,3,3-tetramethoxypropane).  The activity of SOD in the renal tissues was measured using a commercial assay kit
(Jiancheng Bioengineering Institute), following the manufacturer's instructions.
Briefly, this assay kit employs a thiazole salt for the detection of superoxide
anions by producing a colored product. The absorbance was measured at a wavelength of
450 nm. One unit of SOD was defined as the total enzyme needed to produce 50%
dismutation of superoxide radicals. To assay catalase (CAT), 100 μL kidney homogenate
was diluted to a total volume of 1.2 mL with sodium phosphate buffer (50 mM), pH 7.0,
and mixed with 1 mL H2O2 solution (30 mM). The IOD of each
sample was measured at 240 nm for 3 min against a reagent blank containing buffer
instead of kidney homogenate. CAT values were reported as the absorbance at 405 nm.
An enzyme activity unit was defined as the degradation of 1 μmol
H2O2·s-1·mg-1 protein. The enzyme
activity is reported as units/mg protein.

BODY.MATERIAL AND METHODS.WESTERN BLOTTING:
Protein concentrations were measured using the bicinchoninic acid protein assay
(Thermo Scientific, USA). Equal amounts of boiled protein (40 μg) in the loading
buffer were separated via NuPAGE 10% Bis-Tris sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (Life Technologies, USA) and then electrophoretically transferred
to polyvinylidene fluoride membranes (Millipore). The membranes were subsequently
incubated with primary antibodies (anti-TGF- α antibody, 1:800 dilution, bioWORLD,
USA; anti-CTGF antibody, 1:1,000 dilution, Cell Signaling Technology (CST), USA;
anti-HIF-1α, 1:1,000 dilution, Abcam, UK; cleaved caspase 3 antibody, 1:1,000,
dilution, CST; and cleaved caspase 12 antibody, 1:1,000 dilution, Proteintech Group,
Inc., USA), washed three times with TBST buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, 0.15 M NaCl, and
0.05% Tween 20, pH 7.2), and incubated at room temperature for 1 h in the presence of
horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody (goat anti-rabbit IgG, 1:50,000;
Boster). After the blots were washed three times with TBST buffer, they were
developed and exposed using an enhanced chemiluminescence system on Hyperfilm X-ray
films. The resultant protein bands were quantified by densitometry (QuantityOne 4.5.0
software; Bio-Rad Laboratories, USA).

BODY.MATERIAL AND METHODS.TERMINAL DEOXYNUCLEOTIDYL-TRANSFERASE-MEDIATED DUTP DIGOXIGENIN NICK END LABELING
(TUNEL) ASSAY:
Apoptosis was evaluated via the in situ TUNEL assay, according to
the manufacturer's instructions (Roche, USA). Serial sagittal sections of the kidney
were digested with 20 μg/mL proteinase K (Dako, Denmark) for 15 min and then immersed
in 3% hydrogen peroxide for 5 min and incubated with terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase at 37°C for 1 h. The sections were subsequently incubated with an
anti-digoxigenin-peroxidase antibody at 37°C for 30 min,visualized with
diaminobenzidine, and counterstained with hematoxylin. Detection of apoptotic cells
was performed manually under a light microscope at a magnification of 200×. The
apoptotic index was calculated as the percentage of cells showing TUNEL positivity.
TUNEL (+) cells were counted from five random fields for each rat.

BODY.MATERIAL AND METHODS.STATISTICAL ANALYSIS:
Data are reported as means±SE. Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS V17.0
software (SPSS, USA). Statistical comparisons between groups were conducted with
one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and the least significant difference test was
performed for multiple comparisons. Change of RSNA was determined by an independent
sample t-test. A value of P<0.05 indicated a
significant difference.

BODY.RESULTS.SBP:
As observed by indirect determination, CIH rats displayed a significant increase in
SBP compared with the Norm and NormAng groups from the end of the second week (14
days: CIH vs Norm vs NormAng: 125.5±7.4
vs 100.8±5.3 vs 100.0±6.1 mmHg; CIH
vs Norm: P<0.0001, CIH vs CIHAng: P=0.001).
By the end of the treatment period with Ang(1-7), SBP was restored, reaching values
statistically different from those obtained in the CIH group (28 days: CIH
vs CIHAng: 145.0±8.2 vs 127.0±9.3 mmHg,
P<0.0001). No statistical difference in SBP was observed between the Norm and
NormAng groups (P>0.05; Figure 1).

BODY.RESULTS.RSNA:
As shown in Figure 2, the RSNA baseline of the
CIH group was significantly higher than that of the CIHAng group, which was higher
compared with the Norm and NormAng groups. However, there were no significant
differences between the Norm and NormAng groups with respect to the baseline. After
the acute intervention of Ang(1-7), RSNA was attenuated in the NormAng group.
However, this change was significantly greater in the CIHAng group (P<0.05; Figure 2).

BODY.RESULTS.OXIDATIVE STRESS EVALUATION IN KIDNEY HOMOGENATES:
As observed in Figure 3A–C, both CAT and SOD
renal enzymatic activities were decreased and MDA was increased in the CIH group,
indicating a decreased antioxidant capacity in the kidney of this animal model. After
chronic treatment with Ang(1-7), a significant decline of MDA and rising CAT and SOD
levels were observed. These results confirmed that Ang(1-7) treatment effectively
attenuated the state of oxidative stress in the kidneys of CIH rats. Nitrotyrosine
content was also determined as an additional parameter of renal oxidative stress in
rats. The CIH group displayed increased tissue nitrotyrosine levels, whereas chronic
treatment with Ang(1-7) led to a significant reduction of protein nitration levels in
the kidney (Figure 3D and E).

BODY.RESULTS.MEASUREMENT OF RENAL INTERSTITIAL FIBROSIS IN CIH:
As observed in Figure 4, renal sections
subjected to Sirius red staining and illuminated with polarized light indicated that
the CIH group presented an increased degree of fibrosis compared with the Norm group.
Notably, the CIHAng group chronically treated with Ang(1-7) showed a significant
reduction in the expansion of extracellular matrix proteins. This reduction was
accompanied by a decreased production of CTGF and TGF-β (Figure 5A, B, E and F: percentage of positive cells for CIH
vs CIHAng: CTGF=54.7±4.22 vs 17.8±1.77%,
P<0.0001; IOD: TGF-β=20,906.0±5220.9 vs 8275.4±629.2,
P<0.0001, respectively). Accordingly, CIH rats displayed an increased abundance of
CTGF and TGF-β compared with the Norm group. Ang(1-7) treatment led to a reduction of
these markers in the kidney in CIHAng group. Immunostaining results were confirmed by
immunoblotting analysis of kidney homogenates (Figure
5C, D, G, and H; CIH vs CIHAng: CTGF=0.535±0.08
vs 0.378±0.09; TGF-β=0.605±0.07 vs 0.445±0.09,
respectively). No statistical difference was observed between the Norm and NormAng
groups (P>0.05).

BODY.RESULTS.DETERMINATION OF INFLAMMATORY MARKERS IN THE CIH KIDNEY:
The local expression of IL-6, TNF-α, and HIF-α as markers of inflammation was also
examined by immunohistochemical, immunoblotting, and ELISA. As observed in Figure 6A–F (IOD: CIH vs CIHAng:
IL-6=21,607.3±3418.8 vs 5532.1±1141.8; TNF-α=20,497.4±2126.2
vs 7547.7±696.7; HIF-α=20,883.9±2918.2 vs
7199.2±602.1, respectively), the nontreated CIH group presented an increased renal
expression of IL-6, TNF-α, and HIF-α compared with the Norm group. The reduction in
renal fibrosis was accompanied by a decreased production of local proinflammatory
markers. As was observed for other fibrosis markers evaluated, chronic treatment with
Ang(1-7) reduced the expression of IL-6 and TNF-α in the CIHAng kidney. This result
was confirmed by immunoblotting (Figure 6G and
H) and ELISA (CIH vs CIHAng: IL-6=1025.1±164.9
vs 729.6±130.7 pg/mL, P<0.0001; TNF-α=906.7±137.4
vs 632.7 ±119.1, P<0.0001; Figure 7A and B).

BODY.RESULTS.LEVEL OF ANGII:
As shown in Figure 7C, the CIH group displayed
a significant increase in AngII levels compared with the Norm and NormAng groups (CIH
vs Norm vs NormAng=2533.66±247.94
vs 1362.98±192.45 vs 1255.22±197.79 pg/mL,
P<0.0001). The AngII level was lower in the CIHAng group (1935.63±266.13 pg/mL)
than in the CIH group but higher than in the Norm and NormAng groups (P<0.0001).
There were no significant differences between the Norm and NormAng groups
(P=0.353).

BODY.RESULTS.RENAL CELL APOPTOSIS:
TUNEL staining (Figure 8A and B) showed that
the percentage of TUNEL-positive cells was higher in the CIH group (25.99±1.38%) than
in both Norm (5.01±0.77%) and NormAng groups (4.96±1.27%) (all P<0.05). The ratio
of TUNEL-positive cells in the CIHAng group (14.71±1.84%) was lower than in the CIH
group but higher than in the Norm and NormAng groups (all P<0.05). There were no
significant differences in the ratio of TUNEL-positive cells between the Norm and
NormAng groups (P>0.05). The protein levels of cleaved caspase-3 and cleaved
caspase-12 (Figure 8C and D) were significantly
elevated in the CIH and CIHAng groups compared to the Norm and NormAng groups;
however, the levels in the CIH group were higher than those in the CIHAng group (all
P<0.05). No differences were observed between the Norm and NormAng groups
(P>0.05).

BODY.DISCUSSION:
The incidence of OSA is associated with CKD. The prevalence of sleep apnea has been
found to be as high as 54-94% in non-dialysis dependent patients with CKD and 30-93% in
end-stage renal disease populations. In addition, the prevalence of OSA has been
increasing worldwide over recent decades. As OSA is usually associated with a reduction
in blood oxygen saturation (1), rats with
CIH-induced hypoxia-reoxygenation represent a widely used animal model of human OSA.  Hypoxia and altered O2 perfusion are potential players in the development of
renal injury. Many of the redox-sensitive cytokines such as IL-6 and TNF-α are
proinflammatory and might play a critical role in the initiation and progression of
renal injury. In addition, several factors including oxidative stress, fibrosis, and
activation of the renin-angiotensin system (RAS) are involved in the pathogenesis of
renal injury and lead to the impaired control of RSNA and resistant hypertension. In
this study, CIH rats were randomized to receive Ang(1-7) to assess the effect of this
treatment on OSA-induced renal injury. We determined that Ang(1-7) induced a protective
role and antihyperactive effect in the kidney of CIH animals. First, we demonstrated
that CIH could induce hypertension and renal cell apoptosis as well as oxidative stress,
inflammation, and fibrosis. Then, we found that Ang(1-7) lowered blood pressure and
ameliorated CIH-induced renal injury, reducing the fibrosis and inflammation in the
kidney as well as the associated oxidative stress.  Ang(1-7) is formed from Ang II by a prolyl-endopeptidase, prolyl-carboxypeptidase, or
ACE2, or directly from Ang I through hydrolysis by a prolyl-endopeptidase and an
endopeptidase and is metabolized by ACE to Ang-(1-5). In general, Ang(1-7) opposes the
vascular and proliferative effects of Ang II and exerts complex renal actions in chronic
renal diseases and hypertension. Xu et al. (19)
demonstrated that genetic deletion of the Ang(1-7) receptor Mas produces an extremely
complex phenotype that includes increased blood pressure and decreased baroreflex
function. Casali et al. (20) reported that the
deletion of the Mas receptor is associated with an increase of systolic arterial
pressure and with increased blood pressure variability, indicating that the Ang(1-7)/Mas
axis is important in the autonomic modulation of arterial pressure. In turn, our results
suggest that a chronic subcutaneous perfusion of Ang(1-7) manifested BP-lowering effects
under conditions of chronic hypoxia. This concept is further supported by recent
findings in other hypertensive models (i.e., in two-kidney, one-clip (2K1C) Goldblatt
hypertensive rats and in Ren-2 transgenic rats, a well-defined monogenetic model of
hypertension (21,22).  Glomerular or interstitial inflammation is thought to play an important role in the
initiation of CKD. Furthermore, the release of inflammatory cytokines has been shown to
play a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of OSA-associated renal injury. In the present
study, the induction of CIH in rats resulted in a significant increase in IL-6 and
TNF-α. Ang II has been shown to have a proinflammatory role in OSA and inhibiting its
actions improves inflammation. Consistent with this, Fang et al. (14) demonstrated that deletion of the Ace2 gene
significantly increases cellular inflammation, pro-inflammatory cytokine expression, and
apoptosis following ischemia/reperfusion (I/R). Liu et al. (23) have demonstrated that higher ratios of Ang II/Ang-(1-7)
increased concentrations of inflammatory factors such as TNF-α at renal tissue.
Accordingly, the present results provide strong evidence for an anti-inflammatory effect
of Ang(1-7) in the kidney as evinced by its ability to improve the levels of several
proinflammatory cytokines (IL-6 and TNF-α) in CIH rats. In addition, we found that the
level of Ang II in the CIH group was higher than that in the CIHAng group. Dilauro et
al. (24) demonstrated that treatment with
Ang(1-7) significantly decreased plasma levels of AngII and hypothesized that Ang(1-7)
could promote the increased degradation of Ang II and thereby confer protection in CKD.
It was proposed that the activation of the counter-regulatory RAS axis,
ACE2-Ang(1-7)-Mas, could oppose the effects of the ACE-Ang II-AT1 axis and prevent or
reverse organ damage.  Intermittent hypoxia (IH) is believed to induce oxidative stress, which contributes to
renal injury. Welch et al. (25) reported that the
administration of Ang II to rats using osmotic minipumps resulted in hypertension and
elevated oxidative stress. In addition, reactive oxygen species (ROS), whether
mitochondrial- or cell membrane-derived, might also be responsible for the activation of
classical RAS components, contributing further to the compromise of renal functions. Sun
et al. (26) demonstrated that when mice were
exposed to long-term IH, the kidney became incapable of tolerating IH-induced changes,
reflected by a second increase of renal inflammation along with lipid peroxidation, cell
death, and fibrosis. In comparison, our study found that the level of oxidative stress
increased in the kidney tissue in the CIH group. This finding is also in accordance with
other reports that CIH caused the production of ROS (27
–29). Wysocki et
al. (30) demonstrated that the genetic ablation
of ACE2 in mice was associated with increased kidney ROS owing to elevated levels of
NADPH oxidase activity. Other studies demonstrated that both apoptosis and oxidative
stress, two processes that are associated with I/R and are influenced by Ang II, were
exacerbated by the loss of the Ace2 gene (31,32) and that repetitive
episodes of hypoxia/reoxygenation that are associated with the transient cessation of
breathing during sleep in OSA resemble I/R injury (33). Consistent with these findings, the present study demonstrated that the
enhanced oxidative stress in CIH appeared to be significantly inhibited by Ang(1-7)
treatment. Thus, it can be hypothesized that the ability of Ang(1-7) to notably inhibit
oxidative stress renders a protective effect on CIH rats.  A hypoxic environment accelerates fibrosis, which results in a loss of peritubular
capillaries that correlates with the deterioration in renal function. In addition,
tubulointerstitial hypoxia stimulates the production of collagen, an indicator of
increased fibrogenesis. In 1998, Fine et al. (34)
suggested chronic hypoxia served as the common mediator of the development of
progressive renal disease, with hypoxia acting as the transmitter of glomerular injury
to the tubulointerstitium. The stipulated "chronic hypoxia hypothesis" suggested that
the hypoxic milieu triggers a fibrotic response and the development of fibrosis in
tubulointerstitial cells. In this model, hypoxia causes a decrease in anti-fibrotic
factors in parallel with an increased expression of fibrogenic factors, e.g., TGF-β,
CTGF and Ang II (35,36). According to Kagami et al. (37), Ang II and ROS play an important role in cellular signaling and the
activation of genes of extracellular matrix proteins, such as collagens and fibronectin
via TGF-β (37). By affecting the tissue adjacent
to capillaries and nephrons, the fibrotic response, in turn, exacerbates the hypoxia and
fibrosis, leading to a vicious cycle (38). A
protective role for Ang(1-7) in this process was evidenced in Mas receptor knockout
mice, which display renal dysfunction associated with increased interstitial fibrosis
and the upregulation of mRNA for TGF-β (39,40). In accordance with these reports, in the
present study we determined that the chronic subcutaneous perfusion of Ang(1-7)
ameliorated renal fibrosis and improved the hypoxic condition in the kidney of CIH
animals.  In summary, our findings indicated that Ang(1-7) lowered blood pressure and induced a
protective role in the kidneys of CIH animals and that these effects appeared to be
mediated, at least in part, by inhibiting the release of proinflammatory cytokines and
ameliorating oxidative stress and fibrosis. These results highlight the therapeutic
potential of enhancing Ang(1-7) action as a novel therapy for CIH-induced target organ
damage.