TITLE: Abstract: The IV-3000 Dressing: A Conservative Treatment for Fingertip Injury

  ABSTRACT:


BODY:
INTRODUCTION: Fingertip injuries restricted to the distal phalanx are traditionally treated with surgical flap or grafting techniques. However, methods of treatment may be lacking for patients who are not ideal surgical candidates.1,2,3 We investigated a novel conservative treatment using the IV-3000 (Smith and Nephew) semipermeable dressing, a ubiquitous medical supply. The dressing allows the fingertip to heal by secondary intention, creating a wound microenvironment with a high rate of moisture transmission and limited re-traumatization.4,5  MATERIALS AND METHODS: All patients with simple distal fingertip injury were treated using the IV-3000 dressing protocol during the study period. This original protocol involves creating a sandwich of two adhesive IV-3000 patches around the digit. Patients reapplied the dressing at home every three to four days and were evaluated in office for re-epithelialization and digit function.  RESULTS: Fifteen fingertip injuries were successfully treated with the conservative protocol. There were no significant complications or treatment failures in any of the patients. Wounds showed full re-epithelization in as little as two weeks and were healed by six to eight weeks.  CONCLUSION: In conclusion, the IV-3000 wound management protocol is an excellent option for patients unsuited to surgical treatment of fingertip wounds, and it may be easily implemented by plastic surgeons in their daily clinical practice. The dressing allows for outpatient management of fingertip wounds while yielding results that are excellent in terms of aesthetics and preserved digit function.  DISCLOSURES:
None of the authors have a financial interest in any of the products, devices, or drugs mentioned in this manuscript.  REFERENCES:  1. Lemmon JA, Janis JE, Rohrich RJ. Soft-tissue injuries of the fingertip: methods of evaluation and treatment. An algorithmic approach. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2008 Sep;122(3):105e-117e.  2. Williamson DM, Sherman KP, Shakespeare DT. The use of semipermeable dressings in fingertip injuries. J Hand Surg Br. 1987;12(1):125–126.  3. Krauss EM, Lalonde DH. Secondary healing of fingertip amputations: a review. Hand 2014;9(3):282–288.  4. Lin YS, Chen J, Li Q, Pan KP. Moisture vapor transmission rates of various transparent dressings at different temperatures and humidities. Chin Med J. 2009;122(8):927–930.  5. Irion G, editor. Comprehensive wound management. 2nd ed. Thorofare, NJ: Slack Incorporated; 2009.